Recession In economics, a recession is a business cycle contraction, a general
slowdown in economic activity. Macroeconomic indicators such as GDP,
employment, investment spending, capacity utilization, household income,
business profits, and inflation fall, while bankruptcies and the unemployment
rate rise. Recessions generally occur when there is a widespread drop in
spending (an adverse demand shock). This is may be triggered by various events,
such as a financial crisis, an external trade shock, an adverse supply shock or
the bursting of an economic bubble. Governments usually respond to recessions
by adopting expansionary macroeconomic policies, such as increasing money
supply, increasing government spending and decreasing taxation. Definition. In
a 1975 "New York Times" article, economic statistician Julius Shiskin suggested
several rules of thumb for defining a recession, one of which was "two down
consecutive quarters of GDP". In time, the other rules of thumb were forgotten.
Some economists prefer a definition of a 1.5% rise in unemployment within 12
months. In the United States, the Business Cycle Dating Committee of the
National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) is generally seen as the authority
for dating US recessions. The NBER defines an economic recession as: "a
significant decline in economic activity spread across the economy, lasting
more than a few months, normally visible in real GDP, real income, employment,
industrial production, and wholesale-retail sales." Almost universally,
academics, economists, policy makers, and businesses defer to the determination
by the NBER for the precise dating of a recession's onset and end. In the
United Kingdom, recessions are generally defined as two successive quarters of
negative growth, Attributes. A recession has many attributes that can occur
simultaneously and includes declines in component measures of economic activity
(GDP) such as consumption, investment, government spending, and net export
activity. These summary measures reflect underlying drivers such as employment
levels and skills, household savings rates, corporate investment decisions,
interest rates, demographics, and government policies. Economist Richard C. Koo
wrote that under ideal conditions, a country's economy should have the
household sector as net savers and the corporate sector as net borrowers, with
the government budget nearly balanced and net exports near zero. When these
relationships become imbalanced, recession can develop within the country or
create pressure for recession in another country. Policy responses are often
designed to drive the economy back towards this ideal state of balance. A
severe (GDP down by 10%) or prolonged (three or four years) recession is
referred to as an economic depression, although some argue that their causes
and cures can be different. As an informal shorthand, economists sometimes
refer to different recession shapes, such as V-shaped, U-shaped, L-shaped and
W-shaped recessions. Type of recession or shape. The type and shape of
recessions are distinctive. In the US, V-shaped, or short-and-sharp
contractions followed by rapid and sustained recovery, occurred in 1954 and
1990–91; U-shaped (prolonged slump) in 1974–75, and W-shaped, or double-dip
recessions in 1949 and 1980–82. Japan’s 1993–94 recession was U-shaped
and its 8-out-of-9 quarters of contraction in 1997–99 can be described as L-
shaped. Korea, Hong Kong and South-east Asia experienced U-shaped recessions in
1997–98, although Thailand’s eight consecutive quarters of decline should
be termed L-shaped. Psychological aspects. Recessions have psychological and
confidence aspects. For example, if the expectation develops that economic
activity will slow, firms may decide to reduce employment levels and save money
rather than invest. Such expectations can create a self-reinforcing downward
cycle, bringing about or worsening a recession. Consumer confidence is one
measure used to evaluate economic sentiment. The term animal spirits has been
used to describe the psychological factors underlying economic activity.
Economist Robert J. Shiller wrote that the term "...refers also to the sense of
trust we have in each other, our sense of fairness in economic dealings, and
our sense of the extent of corruption and bad faith. When animal spirits are on
ebb, consumers do not want to spend and businesses do not want to make capital
expenditures or hire people." Balance sheet recession. The bursting of a real
estate or financial asset price bubble can cause a recession. For example,
economist Richard Koo wrote that Japan's "Great Recession" that began in 1990
was a "balance sheet recession." It was triggered by a collapse in land and
stock prices, which caused Japanese firms to have negative equity, meaning
their assets were worth less than their liabilities. Despite zero interest
rates and expansion of the money supply to encourage borrowing, Japanese
corporations in aggregate opted to pay down their debts from their own business
earnings rather than borrow to invest as firms typically do. Corporate
investment, a key demand component of GDP, fell enormously (22% of GDP) between
1990 and its peak decline in 2003. Japanese firms overall became net savers
after 1998, as opposed to borrowers. Koo argues that it was massive fiscal
stimulus (borrowing and spending by the government) that offset this decline
and enabled Japan to maintain its level of GDP. In his view, this avoided a
U.S. type Great Depression, in which U.S. GDP fell by 46%. He argued that
monetary policy was ineffective because there was limited demand for funds
while firms paid down their liabilities. In a balance sheet recession, GDP
declines by the amount of debt repayment and un-borrowed individual savings,
leaving government stimulus spending as the primary remedy. Paul Krugman
discussed the balance sheet recession concept during 2010, agreeing with Koo's
situation assessment and view that sustained deficit spending when faced with a
balance sheet recession would be appropriate. However, Krugman argued that
monetary policy could also affect savings behavior, as inflation or credible
promises of future inflation (generating negative real interest rates) would
encourage less savings. In other words, people would tend to spend more rather
than save if they believe inflation is on the horizon. In more technical terms,
Krugman argues that the private sector savings curve is elastic even during a
balance sheet recession (responsive to changes in real interest rates)
disagreeing with Koo's view that it is inelastic (non-responsive to changes in
real interest rates). A July 2012 survey of balance sheet recession research
reported that consumer demand and employment are affected by household leverage
levels. Both durable and non-durable goods consumption declined as households
moved from low to high leverage with the decline in property values experienced
during the subprime mortgage crisis. Further, reduced consumption due to higher
household leverage can account for a significant decline in employment levels.
Policies that help reduce mortgage debt or household leverage could therefore
have stimulative effects. Liquidity trap. A liquidity trap is a Keynesian
theory that a situation can develop in which interest rates reach near zero
(ZIRP) yet do not effectively stimulate the economy. In theory, near-zero
interest rates should encourage firms and consumers to borrow and spend.
However, if too many individuals or corporations focus on saving or paying down
debt rather than spending, lower interest rates have less effect on investment
and consumption behavior; the lower interest rates are like "pushing on a
string." Economist Paul Krugman described the U.S. 2009 recession and Japan's
lost decade as liquidity traps. One remedy to a liquidity trap is expanding the
money supply via quantitative easing or other techniques in which money is
effectively printed to purchase assets, thereby creating inflationary
expectations that cause savers to begin spending again. Government stimulus
spending and mercantilist policies to stimulate exports and reduce imports are
other techniques to stimulate demand. He estimated in March 2010 that developed
countries representing 70% of the world's GDP were caught in a liquidity trap.
Paradoxes of thrift and deleveraging. Behavior that may be optimal for an
individual (e.g., saving more during adverse economic conditions) can be
detrimental if too many individuals pursue the same behavior, as ultimately one
person's consumption is another person's income. Too many consumers attempting
to save (or pay down debt) simultaneously is called the paradox of thrift and
can cause or deepen a recession. Economist Hyman Minsky also described a
"paradox of deleveraging" as financial institutions that have too much leverage
(debt relative to equity) cannot all de-leverage simultaneously without
significant declines in the value of their assets. During April 2009, U.S.
Federal Reserve Vice Chair Janet Yellen discussed these paradoxes: "Once this
massive credit crunch hit, it didn’t take long before we were in a recession.
The recession, in turn, deepened the credit crunch as demand and employment
fell, and credit losses of financial institutions surged. Indeed, we have been
in the grips of precisely this adverse feedback loop for more than a year. A
process of balance sheet deleveraging has spread to nearly every corner of the
economy. Consumers are pulling back on purchases, especially on durable goods,
to build their savings. Businesses are cancelling planned investments and
laying off workers to preserve cash. And, financial institutions are shrinking
assets to bolster capital and improve their chances of weathering the current
storm. Once again, Minsky understood this dynamic. He spoke of the paradox of
deleveraging, in which precautions that may be smart for individuals and
firms—and indeed essential to return the economy to a normal
state—nevertheless magnify the distress of the economy as a whole."
Predictors. Although there are no completely reliable predictors, the following
are regarded to be possible predictors. Government responses. Most mainstream
economists believe that recessions are caused by inadequate aggregate demand in
the economy, and favor the use of expansionary macroeconomic policy during
recessions. Strategies favored for moving an economy out of a recession vary
depending on which economic school the policymakers follow. Monetarists would
favor the use of expansionary monetary policy, while Keynesian economists may
advocate increased government spending to spark economic growth. Supply-side
economists may suggest tax cuts to promote business capital investment. When
interest rates reach the boundary of an interest rate of zero percent
conventional monetary policy can no longer be used and government must use
other measures to stimulate recovery. Keynesians argue that fiscal policy, tax
cuts or increased government spending, will work when monetary policy fails.
Spending is more effective because of its larger multiplier but tax cuts take
effect faster. For example, Paul Krugman wrote in December 2010 that
significant, sustained government spending was necessary because indebted
households were paying down debts and unable to carry the U.S. economy as they
had previously: "The root of our current troubles lies in the debt American
families ran up during the Bush-era housing bubble...highly indebted Americans
not only can’t spend the way they used to, they’re having to pay down the
debts they ran up in the bubble years. This would be fine if someone else were
taking up the slack. But what’s actually happening is that some people are
spending much less while nobody is spending more — and this translates into a
depressed economy and high unemployment. What the government should be doing in
this situation is spending more while the private sector is spending less,
supporting employment while those debts are paid down. And this government
spending needs to be sustained..." Stock market. Some recessions have been
anticipated by stock market declines. In "Stocks for the Long Run", Siegel
mentions that since 1948, ten recessions were preceded by a stock market
decline, by a lead time of 0 to 13 months (average 5.7 months), while ten stock
market declines of greater than 10% in the DJIA were not followed by a
recession. The real-estate market also usually weakens before a recession.
However real-estate declines can last much longer than recessions. Since the
business cycle is very hard to predict, Siegel argues that it is not possible
to take advantage of economic cycles for timing investments. Even the National
Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) takes a few months to determine if a peak or
trough has occurred in the US. During an economic decline, high yield stocks
such as fast moving consumer goods, pharmaceuticals, and tobacco tend to hold
up better. However when the economy starts to recover and the bottom of the
market has passed (sometimes identified on charts as a MACD), growth stocks
tend to recover faster. There is significant disagreement about how health care
and utilities tend to recover. Diversifying one's portfolio into international
stocks may provide some safety; however, economies that are closely correlated
with that of the U.S. may also be affected by a recession in the U.S. There is
a view termed the "halfway rule" according to which investors start discounting
an economic recovery about halfway through a recession. In the 16 U.S.
recessions since 1919, the average length has been 13 months, although the
recent recessions have been shorter. Thus if the 2008 recession followed the
average, the downturn in the stock market would have bottomed around November
2008. The actual US stock market bottom of the 2008 recession was in March
2009. Politics. Generally an administration gets credit or blame for the state
of economy during its time. This has caused disagreements about when a
recession actually started. In an economic cycle, a downturn can be considered
a consequence of an expansion reaching an unsustainable state, and is corrected
by a brief decline. Thus it is not easy to isolate the causes of specific
phases of the cycle. The 1981 recession is thought to have been caused by the
tight-money policy adopted by Paul Volcker, chairman of the Federal Reserve
Board, before Ronald Reagan took office. Reagan supported that policy.
Economist Walter Heller, chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers in the
1960s, said that "I call it a Reagan-Volcker-Carter recession. The resulting
taming of inflation did, however, set the stage for a robust growth period
during Reagan's administration. Economists usually teach that to some degree
recession is unavoidable, and its causes are not well understood. Consequently,
modern government administrations attempt to take steps, also not agreed upon,
to soften a recession. Impacts. Unemployment. Unemployment is particularly high
during a recession. Many economists working within the neoclassical paradigm
argue that there is a natural rate of unemployment which, when subtracted from
the actual rate of unemployment, can be used to calculate the negative GDP gap
during a recession. In other words, unemployment will never reach 0 percent and
thus is not a negative indicator of the health of an economy unless it is above
the "natural rate," in which case it corresponds directly to a loss in gross
domestic product, or GDP. The full impact of a recession on employment may not
be felt for several quarters. Research in Britain shows that low-skilled, low-
educated workers and the young are most vulnerable to unemployment in a
downturn. After recessions in Britain in the 1980s and 1990s, it took five
years for unemployment to fall back to its original levels. Many companies
often expect employment discrimination claims to rise during a recession.
Business. Productivity tends to fall in the early stages of a recession, then
rises again as weaker firms close. The variation in profitability between firms
rises sharply. Recessions have also provided opportunities for anti-competitive
mergers, with a negative impact on the wider economy: the suspension of
competition policy in the United States in the 1930s may have extended the
Great Depression. Social effects. The living standards of people dependent on
wages and salaries are more affected by recessions than those who rely on fixed
incomes or welfare benefits. The loss of a job is known to have a negative
impact on the stability of families, and individuals' health and well-being.
History. Global. There is no commonly accepted definition of a global
recession, although the International Monetary Fund (IMF) regards periods when
global growth is less than 3% to be global recessions. The IMF estimates that
global recessions seem to occur over a cycle lasting between 8 and 10 years.
During what the IMF terms the past three global recessions of the last three
decades, global per capita output growth was zero or negative. Economists at
the IMF state that a global recession would take a slowdown in global growth to
three percent or less. By this measure, four periods since 1985 qualify:
1990–1993, 1998, 2001–2002 and 2008–2009. United Kingdom. The most recent
recession to affect the United kingdom was the late-2000s recession. United
States. For the past three recessions, the NBER decision has approximately
conformed with the definition involving two consecutive quarters of decline.
While the 2001 recession did not involve two consecutive quarters of decline,
it was preceded by two quarters of alternating decline and weak growth. Late
2000s. Official economic data shows that a substantial number of nations are in
recession as of early 2009. The US entered a recession at the end of 2007, and
2008 saw many other nations follow suit. The US recession of 2007 ended in June
2009 as the nation entered the current economic recovery. United States. The
United States housing market correction (a possible consequence of United
States housing bubble) and subprime mortgage crisis has significantly
contributed to a recession. The 2008/2009 recession saw private consumption
fall for the first time in nearly 20 years. This indicates the depth and
severity of the current recession. With consumer confidence so low, recovery
will take a long time. Consumers in the U.S. have been hard hit by the current
recession, with the value of their houses dropping and their pension savings
decimated on the stock market. Not only have consumers watched their wealth
being eroded – they are now fearing for their jobs as unemployment rises.
U.S. employers shed 63,000 jobs in February 2008, the most in five years.
Former Federal Reserve chairman Alan Greenspan said on 6 April 2008 that "There
is more than a 50 percent chance the United States could go into recession." On
1 October, the Bureau of Economic Analysis reported that an additional 156,000
jobs had been lost in September. On 29 April 2008, nine US states were declared
by Moody's to be in a recession. In November 2008, employers eliminated 533,000
jobs, the largest single month loss in 34 years. For 2008, an estimated 2.6
million U.S. jobs were eliminated. The unemployment rate in the US grew to 8.5
percent in March 2009, and there were 5.1 million job losses until March 2009
since the recession began in December 2007. That was about five million more
people unemployed compared to just a year prior, which was the largest annual
jump in the number of unemployed persons since the 1940s. Although the US
Economy grew in the first quarter by 1%, by June 2008 some analysts stated that
due to a protracted credit crisis and "rampant inflation in commodities such as
oil, food and steel", the country was nonetheless in a recession. The third
quarter of 2008 brought on a GDP retraction of 0.5% the biggest decline since
2001. The 6.4% decline in spending during Q3 on non-durable goods, like
clothing and food, was the largest since 1950. A 17 November 2008 report from
the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia based on the survey of 51 forecasters,
suggested that the recession started in April 2008 and will last 14 months.
They project real GDP declining at an annual rate of 2.9% in the fourth quarter
and 1.1% in the first quarter of 2009. These forecasts represent significant
downward revisions from the forecasts of three months ago. A 1 December 2008,
report from the National Bureau of Economic Research stated that the U.S. has
been in a recession since December 2007 (when economic activity peaked), based
on a number of measures including job losses, declines in personal income, and
declines in real GDP. By July 2009 a growing number of economists believed that
the recession may have ended. The National Bureau of Economic Research
announced on 20 September 2010 that the 2008/2009 recession ended in June 2009,
making it the longest recession since World War II. Other countries. Many other
countries, particularly in Europe, have undergone decreasing rates of GDP
growth. Some countries have been able to avoid a recession but have still
experienced slower economic activity, such as China. Australia was able to
maintain positive growth throughout the late-2000s (decade) recession.
