Red flag In politics, a red flag is a symbol of Socialism, or Communism, or
sometimes left-wing politics in general. It has been associated with left-wing
politics since the French Revolution. Socialists adopted the symbol during the
Revolutions of 1848 and it became a symbol of communism as a result of its use
by the Paris Commune of 1871. The flags of several communist states, including
China, Vietnam and the Soviet Union, are explicitly based on the original red
flag. The red flag is also used as a symbol by some democratic socialists and
social democrats, for example the Avami National Party (Pakistan), French
Socialist Party and the Social Democratic Party of Germany. The Labour Party in
Britain used it until the late 1980s. It was the inspiration for the socialist
anthem, "The Red Flag". History. In the Middle Ages, ships in combat flew a
long red streamer, called the Baucans, to signify a fight to the death. In one
petition, a group of English sailors asserted that the Crown had no right to a
share of the prize money earned from a Norman ship captured in 1293 because it
had raised the Baucans. (Raising this streamer may have been a relatively novel
practice at this time, since the writers feel the need to explain it.) By the
17th century, the Baucans had evolved into a red flag, or "flag of defiance."
It was raised in cities and castles under siege to indicate that they would not
surrender. "The red flag is a signal of defiance and battle," according to
"Chambers Cyclopedia" (1727–41). The red cap was a symbol of popular revolt
in France going back to the Jacquerie of 1358. The color red become associated
with patriotism early in the French Revolution due to the popularity of the
Tricolour cockade, introduced in July 1789, and the Phrygian cap, introduced in
May 1790. A red flag was raised over the Champ-de-Mars in Paris on July 17,
1791 by Lafayette, commander of the National Guard, as a symbol of martial law,
warning rioters to disperse. As many as fifty anti-royalist protesters were
killed in the fighting that followed. In response, the revolution created their
own red flags to declare "‘the martial law of the people against the revolt
of the court,’ under which all free men were to rally, all the republicans
who had a friend, a son, a relative murdered on the Champ de Mars on July 17,
1791 to avenge." Oddly inverting the original symbolism, the Jacobins protested
this action by flying a red flag to honor the "martyrs' blood" of those who had
been killed. The Jacobin Club ruled France during the Reign of Terror
(1793–1794) and made the red flag an unofficial national emblem. However, the
earlier Tricolor never lost its official status and regained popularity under
Napoleon. British sailors mutinied near the mouth of the River Thames in 1797
and hoisted a red flag on several ships. Two red flags flown by marchers during
the Merthyr riots of 1831 in South Wales were soaked in calf's blood. The red
flags of Merthyr became a potent relic following the execution of early trade
unionist Dic Penderyn (Richard Lewis) in August 1831 despite a public campaign
to pardon him. During the Mexican siege of the Alamo in March 1836, General
Antonio Lopez de Santa Ana displayed a plain red flag (approx. 10 feet square)
from the highest church tower in Bejar. The meaning of this flag was not
socialism: its meaning - directed to the Alamo defenders - meant "no surrender;
no clemency." At much the same time, the Liberal "Colorados" in the Uruguayan
Civil War used red flags. This prolonged struggle at the time got considerable
attention and sympathy from Liberals and revolutionaries in Europe and it was
in this war that Garibaldi first made a name for himself and that he was
inspired to have his troops wear the famous Red Shirts. During the 1848
Revolution in France, Socialists and radical republicans demanded that the red
flag be adopted as France's national flag. Led by poet-politician Alphonse de
Lamartine, the government rejected the crowd's demand: "red flag that you have
brought back here has done nothing but being trailed around the Champ-de-Mars
in the people's blood in [1791 and whereas the Tricolore flag went round the
world along with the name, the glory and the liberty of the homeland!" The
banner of the Paris Commune of 1871 was red and it was at this time that the
red flag became a symbol of communism. The flag was flown at a May Day rally
for an eight-hour workday in Chicago in 1886. A bomb blast killed a policeman
and the Haymarket Eight were arrested and five were executed. This event,
considered the beginning of the international labor movement, is still
commemorated annually in many countries (although not in the U.S.) The red flag
gained great popularity during the Russian Revolution of 1917. The Soviet flag,
with a hammer, a sickle and a star on a red background, was adopted in 1923.
Various Communist and socialist newspapers have used the name "The Red Flag."
In China, both the Nationalist Party-led Republic of China and the Communist
Party-led People's Republic of China use a red field for their flags, a
reference to their revolutionary origins. In more recent times, social
democratic parties have gravitated away from the Red Flag as a symbol. However,
several European parties retain a "red square" symbol, including Germany's SPD
and the Party of European Socialists. The building to have had a red flag
flying for the longest period of time and to still have one is the Victorian
Trades Hall in Melbourne, Australia. The flag has been flying for over a
century. The British Labour Party. The red flag was the emblem of the British
Labour Party from its inception until the Labour Party Conference of 1986 when
it was replaced by a red rose, itself a variant of the "Fist and Rose" then in
wide use by left of center parties in Europe. The more floral red rose design
has subsequently been adopted by a number of other socialist and social-
democratic parties throughout Europe. Members of the party also sing the
traditional anthem "The Red Flag" at the conclusion of the annual party
conference. In February 2006 the "Red Flag" was sung in Parliament to mark the
centenary of the Labour Party's founding. The flag was regularly flown above
Sheffield Town Hall on May Day under David Blunkett's Labour administration of
Sheffield during the 1980s, leading to Sheffield being labelled the People's
Republic of South Yorkshire. Laws to ban red flags. During the Red Scare of
1919-20 in the United States, many states passed laws forbidding the display of
red flags, including Minnesota, South Dakota, Oklahoma, and California. In
"Stromberg v. California", the United States Supreme Court held that such laws
are unconstitutional. The current flag of Oklahoma dates to this period and was
adopted because of the association of the first flag of Oklahoma, a white star
on a red background, with socialism. Communist/socialist Red Flag as name or
title. It has been common to find streets, buildings, businesses and product
brands named after the Red Flag in nominally socialist countries. For example,
a famous line of limousine cars manufactured by China FAW Group Corporation has
the brand name of Red Flag.
