Red-baiting Red-baiting is the act of accusing, denouncing, attacking or
persecuting an individual or group as communist, socialist, or anarchist, or
sympathetic toward communism, socialism, or anarchism. The word "red" in "red-
baiting" is derived from the red flag signifying radical left-wing politics. In
the United States the term "red-baiting" dates from at least 1927. In 1928,
black-listing by the Daughters of the American Revolution was charterized as a
'red-baiting relic'. It is a term commonly used in the United States, and in
United States history, red-baiting is most often associated with McCarthyism,
which originated in the two historic Red Scare periods of the 1920s (First Red
Scare) and 1950s (Second Red Scare). In the 21st century, red-baiting does not
have quite the same effect it previously did due to the fall of Soviet-style
Communism, but some pundits have argued that notable events in current American
politics indicates a resurgence of red-baiting consistent with the 1950s.
History. 20th century. Red-baiting was employed in opposition to anarchists in
the United States as early as the late 1870s when businessmen, religious
leaders and editorial writers tried to rally middle class workers to oppose
dissident railroad workers and again during the Haymarket affair in the mid-
1880s. Red-baiting was well established in the U.S. during the decade before
World War I. In the post-war period of 1919-1921 the U.S. government employed
it as a central tactic in dealing with labor radicals, anarchists, communists,
and foreign agents. These actions in reaction to the First Red Scare and the
concurrent Red terror, served as part of the organizing principle shaping
counter-revolutionary policies and serving to institutionalize anti-communism
as a force in American politics. The period between the first and second Red
Scares was relatively calm owing to the success of government anti-communism,
the suppressive effects of New Deal policies on radical organized labor, and
the patriotism associated with total mobilization during World War II. Red-
baiting reemerged in the late 1940s and early 1950s during the period known as
the Second Red Scare due to mounting Cold War tensions and the spread of
communism abroad. U.S. Senator Joseph McCarthy's controversial red-baiting of
suspected communists and communist sympathizers in the U.S. Department of
State, and the creation of an entertaintment industry blacklist, led to the
term “McCarthyism” being coined to signify any type of reckless political
persecution or witch-hunt. The history of anti-communist red-baiting in
general, and McCarthyism in particular, continues to be hotly debated, and
political divisions this controversy created continue to make themselves felt.
Conservative critics contend that revelations such as the Venona project
decryptions and the FBI Silvermaster File at least mute if not outright refute
the charge that red-baiting in general was unjustified. Historian Nicholas von
Hoffman wrote in "The Washington Post" that evidence revealed in the Venona
project forced him to admit that McCarthy was "closer to the truth than those
who ridiculed him". Liberal critics contend that, even if someone could prove
that the U.S. government was infiltrated by Soviet spies, McCarthy was censured
by the U.S. Senate because he was in fact reckless and politically
opportunistic, and his red-baiting ruined the lives of countless innocent
people. Historian Ellen Schrecker wrote that ""in this country," McCarthyism
did more damage to the constitution than the American Communist Party ever
did." 21st century. In the 21st century, red-baiting does not have quite the
same effect it previously did due to the fall of Soviet-style Communism, but
some pundits have argued that notable events in current American politics
indicates a resurgence of red-baiting consistent with the 1950s. The United
States government's measures in 2008 to address the subprime mortgage crisis,
such as TARP, were not only criticized as “corporate welfare” but red-
baited as a “gateway to socialism”. Political activist and author Tim Wise,
however, argues that the emergence of red-baiting may be motivated by racism
towards U.S. President Barack Obama and fear that the progressive policies of
his administration will erode white privilege in the United States. Some
commentators argue that red-baiting was used by John McCain, Republican
presidential nominee in the 2008 United States election, when he argued that
Democratic nominee Barack Obama's improvised comments on wealth redistribution
to “Joe the Plumber” was a promotion of “socialism”. Journalist David
Remnick, who wrote the biography "The Bridge: The Life and Rise of Barack
Obama", countered that it should now be obvious that after one year in office
Obama is a centre-left president and the majority of his policies are in line
with the center-left Democratic tradition; while, in July 2011, "The Fiscal
Times" columnist Bruce Barlett argues that an honest examination of the Obama
presidency must conclude that he has in fact been a moderately conservative
Democrat and that it may take 20 years before Obama’s basic conservatism is
widely accepted, and author and columnist Chris Hedges argues that the Obama
administration's policies are mostly right-wing. In April 2009, U.S.
Representative Spencer Bachus claimed that 17 of his Congressional colleagues
were socialists, but would only name one, Bernie Sanders, who has been openly
describing himself as a democratic socialist for years. Sanders countered that
American conservatives blur the differences between socialism and communism,
between democracy and totalitarianism. He argued that the United States would
benefit from a serious debate about comparing the quality of life for the
middle class in the U.S. and in Nordic countries with a long social-democratic
tradition like Sweden, Norway, and Finland. In May 2009, a number of
conservative members of the Republican National Committee were pressing the
committee and by extension, RNC chairman Michael Steele, to officially adopt
the position that the Democratic Party is socialist. Over a dozen members of
the conservative wing of the RNC submitted a new resolution, to be eventually
voted on by the entire RNC, that would call on the Democratic party to rename
itself the “Democrat Socialist Party.” If the RNC adopted this resolution,
the RNC’s official view would become that Democrats are socialists. On
Wednesday 20 May 2009, supporters of the resolution instead agreed to accept
language urging Democrats to "stop pushing our country towards socialism and
government control", thus ending a fight within the ranks of the Republican
Party that reflected the divide between those who want a more centrist message
and those seeking a more aggressive, conservative voice, such as the one
expressed by the Tea Party movement. Frank Llewellyn, national director of
Democratic Socialists of America, argued that Republicans never really define
what they mean by “socialism” and are simply engaging in the politics of
fear. In July 2009, talk show host Glenn Beck began to devote what would become
many episodes on his TV and radio shows, focusing on President Obama's Director
of White House Council on Environmental Quality, Van Jones. Beck was especially
critical of Jones' previous involvement in radical protest movements, and
referred to him as a "communist-anarchist radical". In September 2009, Jones
resigned his position in the Obama administration, after a number of his past
statements became fodder for conservative critics and Republican officials.
"Time" magazine credited Beck with leading conservatives' attack on Jones,
which Jones characterized as a "vicious smear campaign" and an effort to use
"lies and distortions to distract and divide".
