Redbud Woods controversy The Redbud Woods controversy was a dispute between
protesters and the administration of Cornell University in Ithaca, New York
over the demolition of a patch of woodlands known as the "Redbud Woods." The
area received this name because of the many Redbud trees that grew there and
whose blossoms gave the woods a pink tint in the springtime. The website of
Cornell University Planatations contained, on September 3, 2005, a description
of the woods, and used the name Redbud Woods, so it had some official status at
Cornell under this name. History. Early in Cornell's history, at the turn of
the 20th century, banker and hardware magnate Robert H. Treman, Class of 1878,
built his family estate on University Hill, just west of today's West Campus.
Treman hired his friend Warren Manning, a pioneer of American landscape
architecture, to design the site. The "Ithaca Daily News" of November 2, 1901
reported that the west lawn would be "left to nature as the best gardener."
Upon his death in 1937, Treman, who preserved all of the Ithaca area's gorges,
donated $5000 to the University specifically for the beautification of the
campus. Much of his west lawn grew into the Redbud Woods, which retains many
original Manning design elements and boasts locally rare yellow oak and
hackberry trees as well as an unusually dense stand of redbuds. Redbud Woods
was part of the landscaping of Robert H. Treman's historic estate. In the late
19th century Warren Manning designed the landscape of the Treman family estate
(now Von Cramm Hall, 660, and the Kahin Center) so that it would grow into
natural woodlands and beautify the campus. The woods, if left to grow
untouched, might eventually reach the stage of a climax forest. Over time,
Redbud Woods became perceived as a buffer between the University and the
surrounding community. In 1970, the University proposed to construct a parking
lot behind Von Cramm Hall. However, this proposal was dropped after by protests
led by Gordon G. Chang. 2005 controversy. Background. As part of its "West
Campus Residential Initiative," Cornell decided to relocate approximately 176
parking spots to the area occupied by the Redbud Woods, about 2 blocks from the
new dorms. However, in 2001, the Ithaca Common Council named Redbud Woods a
historic district. The University sued the city, and in 2005, the New York
State Supreme Court's Appellate division ruled in Cornell's favor, allowing
construction of the parking lot to proceed. Points of view. In the fall of
2004, then University President Jeffrey Lehman had presented three challenges
to the University, the third of which was sustainability. Lehman went on to
more fully articulate Cornell's "institutional commitment to sustainability."
Some, including many Cornell faculty, students and Ithaca community members,
argued that paving a historic urban green space for a surface parking lot was
unsustainable. They suggested that parking needs might be satisfied elsewhere
on campus and be further mitigated through demand management, promotion of
public transit, and planning. Those in opposition to construction of the lot
also argued that paving the woods might increase localized flooding and allow
for the leakage of toxic materials, for example motor oil, into the storm sewer
system and ultimately into Cayuga Lake, which supplies drinking water for many
living in Tompkins County. Major protests around the construction of the
parking lot continued through the summer of 2005, including the occupation of
President Jeffrey Lehman's office on April 28, 2005 by eight students, as well
as a protracted direct action occupation of the woods themselves by students,
faculty, and community members, in opposition to what appeared to be imminent
destruction. Notably, former Ithaca mayor, and Cornell professor emeritus, Ben
Nichols was cited during protests against the deforestation plan. [http://
www.news.cornell.edu/stories/Nov07/Nichols.obit.ws.html] Final agreement. On
July 18, 2005, Cornell University interim president Hunter Rawlings visited
Redbud Woods and signed an agreement between the University and many of the
Redbud protesters, effectively ending the dispute, although some independent
protests continued. Along with a pledge by Cornell to offer free travel passes
for buses to all new students entering the University in the fall of 2005 and
2006 who did not purchase parking permits, the agreement included commitments
on the university's part to involve the community more in administration
decisions, as well as to engage in constructive dialogue concerning
sustainability on campus. By August 2005 several thousand new students had
taken advantage of the free travel passes, which helped to raise demand on the
Tompkins Consolidated Area Transit bus system that services Ithaca and the rest
of the county Media documentation. The "New York Times" published three
articles about the Redbud Woods controversy in June and July 2005. Locally,
"The Ithaca Journal" and the "Cornell Daily Sun" published many articles over
the course of 2004–2005 about the protests. Aftermath. A key point in the
negotiated agreement signed by student protesters (but not community members)
was that students receive free travel passes to encourage sustainable
transportation. Cornell began this process for incoming students during the
semester immediately following the occupation for incoming students, adding to
free passes which were already provided to transfer and graduate students. Two
years later, free passes for graduate, transfer, and sophomore students were
eliminated, and the program only offered going forward to first year students.
A faculty and community committee proposed a memorial plaque to the Ithaca
Common Council in early 2006, to be placed on public land adjacent to the
parking lot. Despite opposition from Cornell University, the City of Ithaca
approved Remember the trees… Remember all who tried to save them.
