Redistribution of wealth Redistribution of wealth is the transfer of income,
wealth or property from some individuals to others caused by a social mechanism
such as taxation, monetary policies, welfare, charity, divorce or tort law. The
desirability and effects of redistribution are actively debated on ethical and
economic grounds. Types of redistribution. Today, income redistribution occurs
in some form in most democratic countries. In a progressive income tax system,
a high income earner will pay a higher tax rate than a low income earner. The
difference between the Gini index for an income distribution before taxation
and the Gini index after taxation is an indicator for the effects of such
taxation. "Property redistribution" is a term applied to various policies
involving taxation or nationalization of property, or of regulations ordering
owners to make their property available to others. Public programs and policy
measures involving redistribution of property include eminent domain, land
reform, inheritance tax and certain provisions found in family law. Two common
types of governmental redistribution of wealth are subsidies and vouchers (such
as food stamps). These "transfer payment" programs are funded through general
taxation, but disproportionately benefit the poor, who pay fewer or no taxes.
While the persons receiving redistributions from such programs may prefer to be
directly given cash, these programs may be more palatable to society, as it
gives society some measure of control over how the funds are spent. Current
policy illustration. Currently in the United States, any means-tested
entitlement program can be considered a redistributive effort. This is because
the US Government practices a progressive income tax that disproportionately
yields public revenues from various earnings brackets. As the wealthy pay more
into the system and the poor receive more marginal utility through programs
such as TANF, Medicaid, FHA insured loans, and the earned income tax credit
(all of which are means-tested), it could be argued that the United States has
democratically opted for the redistribution of wealth. Each of these programs
provide services or financial aid to the poor. Supporting arguments. The
objectives of income redistribution are varied and almost always include the
funding of public services. Supporters of redistributive policies argue that
less stratified economies are more socially just. This states that the utility
of society (W) is dependent on that of the least (min) individual (Yi), or in
terms of income, the poorest individual. In this case, society would want to
distribute income to the poorest individuals until all incomes were equal.
Another argument is that the rich exploit the poor or otherwise gain unfair
benefits, and thus should return some of those benefits. Another argument is
that a larger middle class benefits an economy by enabling more people to be
consumers, while providing equal opportunities for individuals to reach a
better standard of living. Some proponents of redistribution argue that
capitalism results in an externality that creates unequal wealth distribution.
They also argue that economic inequality contributes to crime. There is also
the issue of equal opportunity to access services such as education and health
care. Studies show that a lower rate of redistribution in a given society
increases the inequality found among future incomes, due to restraints on
wealth investments in both human and physical capital. Roland Benabou states
that greater inequality and a lower redistribution rate decreases the
likelihood that the lower class will register to vote. Benabou does not find a
relationship between levels of inequality and government welfare transfers to
the needy. Some argue that wealth and income inequality are a cause of economic
crises, and that reducing these inequalities is one way to prevent or
ameliorate economic crises, with redistribution thus benefiting the economy
overall, there being synergies. This view was associated with the
underconsumptionism school in the 19th century, now considered an aspect of
some schools of Keynesian economics; it has also been advanced, for different
reasons, by Marxian economics. It was particularly advanced in the US in the
1920s by Waddill Catchings and William Trufant Foster. A system with no
redistribution of wealth which adds some measure of redistribution may actually
experience a Pareto Improvement, meaning that no persons within the system are
worse off and at least one person is better off. Such an outcome is most likely
if all high-income people in the system are altruistic in nature, in that they
derive some economic utility in giving to the poor. For example, a rich person
may experience more utility from giving $100 to the poor than they would have
gained had they spent $100 on something for themselves. The poor person
receiving the $100 will also be better off. In addition to altruistic reasons,
rich persons may support governmental redistribution of wealth: 1) as a form of
insurance policy (should they ever become poor, the policy pays off and they
are able to collect benefits from the government); or 2) because it improves
social stability (lowers crime and rioting among poor people), allowing rich
persons to more easily enjoy the benefits of their wealth. According to one
study, "All demographic groups—even those not usually associated with wealth
redistribution such as Republicans and the wealthy—desired a more equal
distribution of wealth than the status quo." the USA Economic effects. Using
statistics from 23 developed countries and the 50 states of the US, British
researchers Richard G. Wilkinson and Kate Pickett show a correlation between
income inequality on the one hand and higher rates of health and social
problems (obesity, mental illness, homicides, teenage births, incarceration,
child conflict, drug use), and lower rates of social goods (life expectancy,
educational performance, trust among strangers, women's status, social
mobility, even numbers of patents issued per capita), on the other. The authors
argue inequality leads to the social ills through the psychosocial stress,
status anxiety it creates. A 2011 report by the International Monetary Fund by
Andrew G. Berg and Jonathan D. Ostry found a strong association between lower
levels of inequality and sustained periods of economic growth. Developing
countries (such as Brazil, Cameroon, Jordan) with high inequality have
"succeeded in initiating growth at high rates for a few years" but "longer
growth spells are robustly associated with more equality in the income
distribution." Supply-side economics is a school of macroeconomic thought that
argues that economic growth can be most effectively created by lowering
barriers for people to produce (supply) goods and services, such as lowering
income tax and capital gains tax rates, and by allowing greater flexibility by
reducing regulation. According to supply-side economics, consumers will then
benefit from a greater supply of goods and services at lower prices. Typical
policy recommendations of supply-side economists are lower marginal tax rates
and less regulation. Most economists view supply-side as an ill-conceived
economic theory. Critics of supply-side economics point to the lack of academic
economics credentials by movement leaders such as Jude Wanniski and Robert
Bartley to imply that the theories behind it are bankrupt. Nobel prize winning
economist Paul Krugman published a book dedicated to attacking the theory, and
Reaganomics, under the title "Peddling Prosperity". Mundell in his The Sveriges
Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel acceptance
lecture (awarded for unrelated work in optimum currency area) countered that
the success of price stability was proof that the supply-side revolution had
worked. The continuing debate over supply-side policies tends to focus on the
massive federal and current account deficits, increased income inequality and
its failure to promote growth. The Pigou–Dalton principle is that
redistribution of wealth from a rich person to a poor person reduces
inequality, so long as the order is not switched (the initially richer person
is not made poorer than the initially poorer person: they are brought together
and not switched). Hugh Dalton suggested further that, assuming no effects
other than transfer, such transfers increase collective welfare, because the
marginal utility of income or wealth to a rich person is less than that to a
poor person. Maximal welfare is achieved if all have equal wealth or income.
Dalton's analysis sets aside questions of economic efficiency: redistribution
may increase or decrease overall output – it may grow or shrink the pie, not
simply change how it is divided. The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) has
estimated that extending the Bush tax cuts of 2001-2003 beyond their 2010
expiration would increase deficits by $1.8 trillion dollars over the following
decade. The CBO also completed a study in 2005 analyzing a hypothetical 10%
income tax cut and concluded that under various scenarios there would be
minimal offsets to the loss of revenue. In other words, deficits would increase
by nearly the same amount as the tax cut in the first five years, with limited
feedback revenue thereafter. Through increased budget deficits, the tax cuts
primarily benefiting the wealthy will be paid for — plus interest — by
taxes borne relatively evenly by all taxpayers. The paper points out that these
projected shortfalls in revenue would have to be made up by federal borrowing:
the paper estimates that the federal government would pay an extra $200 billion
in interest over the decade covered by the paper's analysis. In the absence of
negative externalities, the introduction of taxes into a market reduces
economic efficiency by causing deadweight loss. In a competitive market the
price of a particular economic good adjusts to ensure that all trades which
benefit both the buyer and the seller of a good occur. The introduction of a
tax causes the price received by the seller to be less than the cost to the
buyer by the amount of the tax. This causes fewer transactions to occur, which
reduces economic welfare; the individuals or businesses involved are less well
off than before the tax. The tax burden and the amount of deadweight cost is
dependent on the elasticity of supply and demand for the good taxed. Most
taxes—including income tax and sales tax—can have significant deadweight
costs. Prospect of Upward Mobility hypothesis. The Prospect of Upward Mobility
(POUM) hypothesis is an argument that explains why some poor and working class
voters do not support efforts by governments to redistribute wealth. It states
that many people with below average income do not support higher tax rates
because of a belief in their prospect for upward mobility. These workers
strongly believe that there is opportunity for either themselves, their
children, or their grandchildren to move upward on the economic ladder. There
are three key assumptions that form the foundation for the POUM hypothesis.
First, one must assume that policies that are enacted in the present will
endure into the future and carry enough weight to impact the future. Second,
one must assume that poorer workers are "not too risk averse". This assumption
rests on the fact that the people in question must realize that their income
may also go down instead of up. Finally, poor workers must have an optimistic
view of their future, as they expect to go from poorer than the average to
richer than average. After much analysis of the POUM hypothesis, Benabou and Ok
recognize two key limitations. One limitation is that other potential problems
that create more concavity in the POUM system, such as risk aversion, must not
increase too much. Concavity must be kept at a minimum to ensure that the POUM
hypothesis generates the expected results. The other limitation is that there
must be adequate commitment to the choice of fiscal policy including the
government and institutions. Criticism. Conservative, libertarian and
neoliberal arguments against property redistribution consider the term a
euphemism for theft or forced labor, and argue that redistribution of
legitimately obtained property cannot ever be just. Public choice theory states
that redistribution tends to benefit those with political clout to set spending
priorities more than those in need, who lack real influence on government. In
the United States, some of the founding fathers and several subsequent leaders
expressed opposition to redistribution of wealth. Samuel Adams stated: "The
utopian schemes of leveling of wealth, and a community of goods, are as
visionary and impracticable as those that vest all property in the Crown. ideas
are arbitrary, despotic, and, in our government, unconstitutional." James
Madison, author of the Constitution, wrote, "I cannot undertake to lay my
finger on that article of the Constitution which granted a right to Congress of
expending, on objects of benevolence, the money of their constituents."
