Referendum A referendum (also known as a plebiscite or a vote on a ballot
question) is a direct vote in which an entire electorate is asked to either
accept or reject a particular proposal, usually a piece of legislation which
has been passed into law by the local legislative body and was signed by the
pertinent executive official(s). This may result in the adoption of a new
constitution, a constitutional amendment, a law, the recall of an elected
official or simply a specific government policy. It is a form of direct
democracy. Terminology. In the United States, a plebiscite is typically known
as an initiative when originating in a petition of ordinary citizens, and as a
referendum only if it consists of a proposal referred to voters by the
legislature. A plebiscite can be considered a kind of election and is often
referred to as such in the U.S. (an "election" literally means a choice). In
other countries, the term "election" is often reserved for events in which
elected representatives are chosen. Procedure and status. In a first
classification by necessity, a referendum may be mandatory, that is, the law
(usually the constitution) directs authorities to holding referendums on
specific matters (such is the case in amending most constitutions, or
impeaching heads of state as well as ratifying international treaties) and are
usually binding. A referendum can also be facultative, that is it can be
initiated at the will of a public authority (President of the Republic in
France and Romania or the Government/Parliament in Greece or Spain) or at the
will of the citizens (a petition). It can be binding/ non-binding. A
foundational referendum or plebiscite may be drafted by a constituent assembly
before being put to voters. In other circumstances a referendum is usually
initiated either by a legislature or by citizens themselves by means of a
petition. The process of initiating a referendum by petition is known as the
popular or citizens initiative. In the United States the term "referendum" is
often reserved for a direct vote initiated by a legislature while a vote
originating in a petition of citizens is referred to as an "initiative",
"ballot measure" or "proposition." In countries in which a referendum must be
initiated by parliament, it is sometimes mandatory to hold a binding referendum
on certain proposals, such as constitutional amendments. In countries, such as
the United Kingdom, in which referendums are neither mandatory nor binding
there may, nonetheless, exist an unwritten convention that certain important
constitutional changes will be put to a referendum and that the result will be
respected. By nature of their effects, referendums may be either binding or
non-binding. A non-binding referendum is merely consultative or advisory. It is
left to the government or legislature to interpret the results of a non-binding
referendum and it may even choose to ignore them. This is particularly the case
in states that follow Westminster conventions of parliamentary sovereignty. In
most referendums it is sufficient for a measure to be approved by a simple
majority of voters in order for it to be carried. However, a referendum may
also require the support of a super-majority, such as two-thirds of votes cast.
In Lithuania certain proposals must be endorsed by a three-quarters majority
(among them, any proposal to amend article 148 of the Lithuanian Constitution,
which states, "Lithuania is an independent and democratic republic"). In some
countries, including Italy, there is also a requirement that there be a certain
minimum turn-out of the electorate in order for the result of a referendum to
be considered valid. This is intended to ensure that the result is
representative of the will of the electorate and is analogous to the quorum
required in a committee or legislature. The franchise in a referendum is not
necessarily the same as that for elections. For example, in Ireland, only
citizens may vote in a constitutional referendum, whereas citizens of the
United Kingdom are also entitled to vote in general elections. Referendums by
country. Australia. Approval in a referendum is necessary in order to amend the
Australian constitution. A bill must first be passed by both houses of
Parliament or, in certain limited circumstances, by only one house of
Parliament, and is then submitted to a referendum. If a majority of those
voting, as well as separate majorities in each of a majority of states, (and
where appropriate a majority of people in any affected state) vote in favour of
the amendment, it is presented for Royal Assent, given in the Queen's name by
the Governor-General. Due to the specific mention of referendums in the
Australian constitution, non-constitutional referendums are usually termed
plebiscites in Australia. Brazil. Three nationwide referendums were held so far
in Brazilian history. In 1961, the country had just adopted the parliamentary
government system, but in a referendum held in 1963, the Brazilian population
was consulted about which government system should be withheld in the country
and it was decided to have Brazil return to a Presidential system. In 1993,
another referendum to decide Brazil's government system was held. Voters could
choose between keep the presidential republic system, adopt a parliamentary
republic system, or adopt a parliamentary monarchy system. The majority of
voters opined to maintain the current presidential government system. In 2005 a
referendum was held to consult the population about their opinion on the
possibility to forbid the sale and civilian possession of firearms and
ammunition nationwide. Most of voters declared themselves contrary to the ban
and the laws regarding commerce and ownership of weapons in the country
remained unaltered. Canada. Referendums are rare in Canada and only three have
ever occurred at the federal level. The most recent was a referendum in 1992 on
a package of proposed constitutional measures known as the Charlottetown
Accord. Although the Constitution of Canada does not expressly require that
amendments be approved by referendum, many argue that, in light of the
precedent set by the Charlottetown Accord referendum, this may have become a
constitutional convention. A referendum can also occur at the provincial level.
The 1980 and 1995 referendums on the secession of Québec are notable cases. In
conjunction with the provincial election in 2007, the province of Ontario voted
on a mixed-member proportional representation electoral system and British
Columbia held two consecutive referendums on BC-STV in 2005 and 2009. In 2011
British Columbia held yet another referendum against a newly imposed HST tax.
The results ended up making British Columbia the first province to overturn the
harmonization of provincial and federal taxes. Chile. There have been four
plebiscites and one "consultation" in Chilean history. In 1925, a plebiscite
was held over a new constitution that would replace a semi-parliamentary system
with a presidential one. The "Yes" vote won overwhelmingly, with 95% of the
vote. In 1978, after the United Nations protested against Pinochet's régime,
the country's military government held a national consultation, which asked if
people supported Pinochet's rule. The "Yes" vote won with 74%, although the
results have been questioned. Another constitutional plebiscite was held in
1980. The "Yes" won with 68.5%, prolonging Pinochet's term until 1989 and
replacing the 1925 Constitution with a new one still used today. The results of
this plebiscite have also been questioned by Pinochet's opponents, because of
the lack of voters registration. In a historical plebiscite held in 1988, 56%
voted to end the military régime. The next year, yet another plebiscite was
held for constitutional changes for the transition to a democratic government
(the "Yes" vote won with 91%). There have been several referendums in
individual municipalities in Chile since the return to civilian rule in 1990. A
referendum, which took place on 2006 in Las Condes, over the construction of a
mall was noteworthy for being the first instance in Chilean history where
electronic voting machines were used. Costa Rica. October 7, 2007 the first
referendum held in Costa Rica was to approve or reject the free trade agreement
with Central America, Dominican Republic (Costa Rica already has FTAs with the
latter) and the United States known as the Dominican Republic – Central
America Free Trade Agreement (DR-CAFTA). It was very narrowly approved (49.030
votes). Results were 51.62% voted in favour and 48.38% against it. It is
currently the only free trade agreement in the world that has been approved on
a referendum. From 2008 to 2010 conservative groups, linked to religious
institutions, managed to collect 150,000 signatures to call a referendum to
decline unions between same-sex couples. The Supreme Elections Tribunal (TSE)
had scheduled the consultation on December 5, 2010. However, the Constitutional
Chamber of the Supreme Court rejected the referendum stating that "The rights
of minorities that arise from anti-majoritarian claims can not be subjected to
a referendum process which the majority imposes". This consideration supports
the main argument of those who rejected the consultation considered a violation
of human rights, among these gay groups and humanitarian actors. The Board
further considered that "people who have sex with same sex are a group at
disadvantage and discrimination, which requires the support of public
authorities for the recognition of their constitutional rights or other
legislation". Decisions of the Constitutional Court are final so the ruling
stopped the referendum and opened to the Congress the opportunity to continue
discussing the bill on the recognition of homosexual unions. Croatia.
Institution of referendum is regulated by article 87. of constitution of
Croatia. Referendum can be called on any issue falling within competence of
Parliament of Croatia or on any other issue which President of Croatia
considers to be important for the independence, unity and existence of the
Republic. Since amendments to constitution in 2001, Parliament of Croatia is
obligated by constitution to call a referendum if signatures of 10% of
registered voters of Republic of Croatia are collected. Timeframe for
collecting the signatures is defined by Law on referendums and it is 15 days.
Denmark. In Denmark, after a law has been passed by parliament, one third of
the members can demand a referendum. This does not apply to money bills or
expropriation. A law that transfers sovereignty to an international
organisation must be subjected to a referendum unless five sixth of the MPs
vote for it. In both cases, to defeat the law the no votes must not only
outnumber the yes votes, they must also number at least 30% of the electorate.
Since all referendums have had much more than 60% turnout, no bill has yet
passed due to lack of interest. In practise, referendums have been held every
time new treaties of the European Union have been approved, even when more than
five sixths can be found. Recently, the Danish government was highly criticized
when it did not hold a referendum regarding the controversial Lisbon treaty.
The Constitution of Denmark can be changed only after a referendum. To pass,
the yes votes must not only outnumber the no votes, they must also number at
least 40% of the electorate. The present location of the border with Germany
was determined by a referendum in 1920 after the German capitulation. See
Schleswig. Egypt. On 19 March 2011 a constitutional referendum was held in
Egypt, following the Egyptian Revolution of 2011. The reforms made it easier
for candidates to run for president, limited the number of presidential terms
to two four-year periods, and ensured judicial monitoring of elections.
Germany. Following World War II the new republic was founded with only minor
elements of direct democracy. On the federal level there are only two mandatory
constitutional referendum types - one is in case of enacting a new constitution
(although changes to the constitution do not require a public vote and there is
no provision for an initiative for a constitutional amendment) that has never
been used although there was an argument in that direction during German
reunification. The other type requires a public vote in case of restructuring
the Bundesländer states ("Neugliederung des Bundesgebietes") which led to a
referendum on the union of Baden and Württemberg into Baden-Württemberg in
1951 (accepted) and a referendum on the union of Berlin and Brandenburg into
Berlin-Brandenburg in 1996 (rejected). Originally none of the Bundesländer
states had provisions for a general binding referendum ("Volksentscheid"
"people's decision"). Only Hesse and Bavaria have a mandatory binding
referendum on changes to the state constitution. Most states do however have a
form of a general non-binding ballot question ("Volksbefragung" "people's
inquiry") which has been used rarely however - the most important one had been
the Saar Statute referendum, 1955. General forms of direct democracy were first
introduced in the communities with facultative ballot questions
("Bürgerbefragung" "citizens inquiry") and public initiatives
("Bürgerbegehren" "citizens request") that are both non-binding. In some areas
this has been expanded into a binding referendum type ("Bürgerentscheid"
"citizens decision") but almost universally facultative. In some states there
is however a general right on state popular initiatives ("Volksbegehren"
"people's request") which was used in Hamburg to push the state government to
pass a law on a facultative binding state referendum ("Volksentscheid") in
2007. Hong Kong. Due to discontent towards the proposal of political reform
made by the Hong Kong government, the Civic Party and the League of Social
Democrats joined together to carry out "Five Constituencies Referendum" in
early 2010, by having one Legislative Councillors (from either one of the
parties) in each constituency resigned, forcing the government to carry out a
by-election, thus giving a chance for all voters to show their will towards
universal suffrage and the abolishment of functional constituencies .Quite
often, it is refereed as "De facto referendum". The Basic Law of Hong Kong does
not provide for official referendums, but the pan-democrats hope that by
returning the resignees to the Legislative Council, on their manifesto of real
political reform in Hong Kong and the abolition of functional constituencies,
the election can be seen as a de facto referendum and an endorsement of these
issues. The original five pan-democrat Legislative Councillors were re-elected,
the turnout was much lower than the expectation of the two parties, due to the
suppression of pro-Beijing Camp. Iceland. A total of 7 referendums have been
held in Iceland, two of which were held after the nation declared independence
and became a republic in 1944. Iraq. The current Constitution of Iraq was
approved by referendum on 15 October 2005, two years after the United States-
led invasion. The constitution was designed to shift crucial decisions about
government, the judiciary and human rights to a future national assembly. It
was later modified to provide for the establishment of a committee by the
parliament to be elected in December 2005 to consider changes to the
constitution in 2006. Ireland. The current Constitution of Ireland was adopted
by plebiscite on 1 July 1937. In the Republic of Ireland every constitutional
amendment must be approved by referendum; 30 such referendums have occurred so
far (from the enactment of the current constitution to the end of 2009).
Constitutional amendments are first adopted by both Houses of the Oireachtas
(parliament), submitted to a referendum, and are signed into law by the
President. The signature is merely a formality: the president cannot refuse to
sign into law an amendment that has been approved in a referendum. The
constitution also provides for a referendum on an ordinary law, known as an
'ordinary referendum'. Such a referendum can take place only under special
circumstances, and none have yet occurred. The closest referendum result was
1995's vote to legalise divorce - 50.3% voted "Yes" (to legalise divorce) and
49.7% voted "No." Only Ireland held a referendum on the Treaty of Lisbon.
Italy. The constitution of Italy provides for two kinds of binding referendums.
A legislative referendum can be called in order to abrogate a law totally or
partially, if requested by 500,000 electors or five regional councils. This
kind of referendum is valid only if at least a majority of electors goes to the
polling station. It is forbidden to call a referendum regarding financial laws
or laws relating to pardons or the ratification of international treaties. A
constitutional referendum can be called in order to approve a constitutional
law or amendment only when it has been approved by the Houses (Chamber of
Deputies and Senate of the Republic) with a majority of less than two thirds in
both or either House, and only at the request of one fifth of the members of
either House, or 500,000 electors or five Regional Councils. A constitutional
referendum is valid no matter how many electors go to the polling station. Any
citizen entitled to vote in an election to the Chamber of Deputies may
participate in a referendum. Malta. There are three types of referendums in
Malta: constitutional, consultative and abrogative referendums. Constitutional
referendums are required by article 66(3) of the Constitution of Malta. While
binding, it is limited to the single instance of amending the Constitutional
provision on the maximum parliamentary term of five years. This type of
referendum has never taken place. The other categories of referendums are
regulated by the Referenda Act. "Consultative" referendums (the Act does not
use the term) can either take place prior to the assent of a bill in the House
of Representatives or following the parliamentary procedure in a form of a
conditional clause in the said bill. In the former case it would not legally
bind Parliament to approve the said legislation irrelevant of the result of the
said referendum, however the latter case, it would be conventionally binding on
the President to promulgate the bill into law. There has been five referendums
like this on a national level, one on a regional level (Gozo Civic Council
referendum, 1973) and a number of local referendums organised by single Local
Councils. An abrogative referendum has never been held and, if invoked and
successful, can abrogate pieces of legislation barring some exceptions, notably
financial and constitutional law. Moldova. According to Article 75 of the
Constitution of Moldova, "(1) Problems of utmost gravity or urgency confronting
the Moldovan society or State shall be resolved by referendum. (2) The
decisions passed in consequence of the results produced by the republican
referendum have supreme judicial power." There were two referendums held in
Moldova, in 1994 and 2010. Morocco. There have been several referendums in
Morocco, most of which were related to the Moroccan constitution. Since
becoming King, King Mohammed VI has led many reforms that made Morocco an
exception from all the other Arab countries. On February 20, 2011, thousands
took to the streets of Rabat, Casablanca, Tangier and Marrakesh in peaceful
protests demanding a new constitution, a change in government and an end to
corruption. During a march on Hassan II Avenue in Rabat, demonstrators demanded
a new constitution to bring more democracy to the country. They shouted slogans
calling for economic opportunity, education reform, better health services, and
help in coping with the rising cost of living. On March 9, King Mohammed VI
made a speech that was described as a "historical" speech in which he announced
several reforms including a new constitution to the country. In a televised
speech on Friday, 17 June, King Mohammed VI announced a series of
constitutional reforms, to be put to a national referendum on 1 July. The
proposed reforms would give the prime minister and the parliament more
executive authority, and would make Berber an official language in Morocco,
together with Arabic. The proposal would empower the prime minister with the
authority to appoint government officials and to dissolve the parliament - the
powers previously held by the king. However, the king would remain the military
commander-in-chief and would retain his position as the chair of the Council of
Ministers and the Supreme Security Council, the primary bodies responsible for
the security policy. A new constitutional provision would also confirm the
king's role as the highest religious authority in the country. Although most
people were celebrating among the protesters after the King's speech, the
leaders of the 20 February Movement rejected the proposals as insufficient and
called for continuing protests on 19 June 2011. On 29 June 2011, the protesters
called for a boycott of the referendum. The referendum was held on June 1, and
almost all Moroccans said yes to it with a "98% yes" "2% No" turnout.
Netherlands. In principle, national referendums in the Netherlands are not
possible by law. However, from 2002 until 2005, there was a Temporary
Referendum Law in place, which allowed for non-binding referendums, known in
Dutch as "Volksraadpleging" ("People's Consultation"), to be organised for laws
already approved by the House of Representatives. No referendum was called
based on this law. In order to hold the 2005 referendum on the Treaty
establishing a Constitution for Europe, a different law was temporarily put in
place. That referendum was the first national referendum in the Netherlands in
200 years and it was the result of an initiative proposal by parliamentarians
Farah Karimi (Greens), Niesco Dubbelboer (Labour) and Boris van der Ham
(Democrats). New Zealand. New Zealand has two types of referendum. Government
referendums are predominantly about alcohol policy (although none has been held
recently) or constitutional issues. However, there are also referendums on
other issues. Furthermore, constitutional issues, such as the establishment of
the Supreme Court of New Zealand, may be done without a referendum. Government
referendums can be binding or non-binding. Since 1993, New Zealand also has
provision for non-binding citizens-initiated referendums. To initiate a
citizens-initiated referendum on a particular issue, proponents of the
referendum apply to the Clerk of the House of Representatives, and once the
question wording is determined, proponents have twelve months to compile a
petition containing signatures from at least ten percent of all registered
voters. Only four citizens-initated referendums have gone to a vote: one in
1995, two in 1999, and one in 2009. Norway. The Norwegian Constitution does not
mention refendums at all, and as such, referendums are not a part of Norwegian
political practice. However, six advisory referendums have been held in Norway,
most notably, the referendums on Norwegian EU membership, and the referendum
for dissolving the union with Sweden. It is worth noting that these
referendums, and potential future referendums, although legitimate as part of
Norwegian constitutional convention, will not have any "legal binding": They
will merely be advisory, and the final decision will be taken by the Norwegian
parliament, who may choose (albeit unlikely) to disregard the will of the
Norwegian people as expressed through the referendum. Portugal. abortion, in
1998, when the "No" won; regionalization, in 1998, when the "No" won; abortion,
in 2007, where the "Yes" won. This referendum was asked because the first
referendum on this issue had a low turnout. Romania. Under the Romanian
Constitution of 1991, revised in 2003, there are three situations in which
referendums can be held. Article 90 of the Constitution establishes a
facultative and non-binding referendum, which the President can initiate on
matters of principle. Article 95 establishes a mandatory and binding referendum
for the impeachment of the President in case he is deemed guilty of disobeying
the Constitution. Article 151 also establishes a mandatory and binding
referendum on approving Constitutional amendments. This last provision has been
used twice: in adopting the Romanian Constitution in 1991, and amending it in
2003. Serbia. The Constitution of the Republic of Serbia was adopted on a
referendum held in 28–29 October 2006. The constitutional referendum passed
with 3,521,724 voting a 53.04% majority. 3,645,517 or 54.91% voted on the
referendum, which made it legitimate. Singapore. According to the Constitution
of Singapore, a referendum can be held in a few circumstances, including
situations when a constitutional amendment passed by the Parliament is rejected
by the President, or when the nation's sovereignty needs to be decided (i.e.
merger or incorporation into other countries). There has been only one
referendum in Singapore to date, which is the 1962 national referendum,
deciding on the merger of Singapore into Malaysia. Singapore was eventually
forced to secede from Malaysia and declared independence, which had not even
been an option in the referendum, on 9 August 1965. Hence, Singapore became the
only country to become independent against its own will. Sweden. The
Constitution of Sweden provides for both binding and non-binding referendums.
Since the introduction of parliamentary democracy, six referendums have been
held: the first was about alcohol prohibition in 1922, and the most recent was
about euro membership in 2003. All have been non-binding, consultative
referendums. Two, in 1957 and 1980, were multiple-choice referendums.
Switzerland. The possibility of facultative referendums forces the parliament
to search for a compromise between the major interest groups. In many cases,
the mere threat of a facultative referendum or of an initiative is enough to
make the parliament adjust a law. The referendums are said, by their
adversaries, to slow politics down. On the other hand, empirical scientists,
e.g. Bruno S. Frey among many, show that this and other instruments of
citizens' participation, direct democracy, contribute to stability and
happiness. The votes on referendums are always held on a Sunday, typically
three or four times a year, and in most cases, the votes concern several
referendums at the same time, often at different political levels (federal,
cantonal, municipal). Referendums are also often combined with elections. The
percentage of voters is around 40% to 50%, unless there is an election. The
decisions made in referendums tend to be conservative. Citizens' initiatives
are usually not passed. The federal rule and referendums have been used in
Switzerland since 1848. Taiwan. The "Referendum Act" was promoted and
introduced by the Democratic Progressive Party for years and then enacted by
the Legislative Yuan in 2003. There have been six national referendums and two
local referendums in Taiwan. United Kingdom. Although Acts of Parliament may
permit referendums to take place, the doctrine of parliamentary sovereignty
means any Act of Parliament giving effect to a referendum result could be
reversed by a subsequent Act of Parliament. As a result, referendums in the
United Kingdom cannot be constitutionally binding, although they will usually
have a persuasive political effect. Major referendums are rare; only two have
been put to the entire UK electorate. The first was the United Kingdom European
Communities membership referendum, 1975, which was held two years after British
accession to the European Economic Community to gauge support for continued
membership. The second was the United Kingdom Alternative Vote referendum,
2011. This was to vote on changing the 'First Past the Post' system to an
alternative electoral system, the Alternative Vote. Referendums have been held
in individual parts of the United Kingdom on issues relating to devolution in
Scotland and Wales, an elected Mayor of London and a Greater London Authority
for Greater London, a regional assembly for the North-East of England and the
constitutional status and governance of Northern Ireland. Since 1973, the year
of the first such plebiscite, there have been nine major referendums. In 2004,
Her Majesty's Government promised a UK-wide referendum on the new European
Constitution, but this was postponed in 2005 following the defeats of the
French and Dutch referendums. Due to the replacement of the European
Constitution with the Treaty of Lisbon, there was no obligation for a
referendum. Referendums have also been proposed, but not held, on the
replacement of the pound sterling with the euro as the currency of the United
Kingdom. The present Scottish Government, a Scottish National Party
administration, wishes to hold a referendum on Scottish Independence in 2014.
As it is now a majority government, the referendum can pass through the
Scottish Parliament unhindered. The Westminster government has also indicated
that it will facilitate such a referendum. At the local level, the Government
has put proposals for directly-elected mayors to 37 local authority areas by
referendum. The 1972 Local Government Act also contains a little-used provision
that allows non-binding local referendums on any issue to be called by small
groups of voters. Strathclyde Regional Council held a postal referendum in 1994
on whether control of water and sewerage services should be transferred to
appointed boards: this was largely a political tactic, since this was the
policy of the UK Government at the time. The UK Parliament enacted the
legislation anyway, and it came into force on 1 April 1996. United States. In
the United States, the term "referendum" typically refers to a popular vote
originated by petition to overturn legislation already passed at the state or
local levels (mainly in the western United States). In industrial cities and
regions, it refers to internal, union organization in terms of electing
delegates or approving a collective bargaining agreement. By contrast,
"initiatives" and "legislative referrals" consist of newly drafted legislation
submitted directly to a popular vote as an alternative to adoption by a
legislature. Collectively, referendums and initiatives in the United States are
commonly referred to as ballot measures, initiatives, or propositions. There is
no provision for the holding of referendums at the federal level in the United
States; indeed, there is no national electorate of any kind. The United States
constitution does not provide for referendums at the federal level. A
constitutional amendment would be required to allow it. However, the
constitutions of 24 states (principally in the West) and many local and city
governments provide for referendums and citizen's initiatives. However, a
Constitutional Convention can be called by two-thirds of the legislatures of
the States, and that Convention to propose one or more amendments to the
Constitution. These amendments are then sent to the states to be approved by
three-fourths of the legislatures or conventions. This route has never been
taken, and there is discussion in political science circles about just how such
a convention would be convened, and what kind of changes it would bring about.
Uruguay. The Uruguayan constitution allows citizens to challenge laws approved
by Parliament by use of a referendum or to propose changes to the Constitution
by the use of a plebiscite. This right has been used a few times in the past 15
years: to confirm an amnesty to members of the military who violated human
rights during the military regime (1973–1985), to stop privatization of
public utilities companies, to defend pensioners' incomes, and to protect water
resources. Multiple-choice referendums. A referendum usually offers the
electorate only two choices, either to accept or reject a proposal, but this
need not necessarily be the case. In Switzerland, for example, multiple choice
referendums are common; two multiple choice referendums held in Sweden, in 1957
and 1980, offered voters a choice of three options; and in 1977 a referendum
held in Australia to determine a new national anthem was held in which voters
were presented with four choices. A multiple choice referendum poses the
problem of how the result is to be determined if no single option receives the
support of an absolute majority (more than half) of voters. This can be
resolved by applying voting systems designed for single winner elections to a
multiple-choice referendum. Swiss referendums get around this problem by
offering a separate vote on each of the multiple options as well as an
additional decision about which of the multiple options should be preferred. In
the Swedish case, in both referendums the 'winning' option was chosen by the
Single Member Plurality ("first past the post") system. In other words the
winning option was deemed to be that supported by a plurality, rather than an
absolute majority, of voters. In the 1977 Australian referendum the winner was
chosen by the system of preferential instant-runoff voting. Although California
does not have deliberate multiple-choice referendums in the Swiss or Swedish
sense (in which only one of several counter-propositions can be victorious, and
the losing proposals are wholly null and void), it does have so many yes-or-no
referendums at each Election Day that the State's Constitution provides a
method for resolving inadvertent conflicts when two or more inconsistent
propositions are passed on the same day. This is a de facto form of Approval
Voting - i.e., the proposition with the most "yes" votes prevails over the
others to the extent of any conflict. Criticisms. Although some advocates of
direct democracy would have the referendum become the dominant institution of
government, in practice and in principle, in almost all cases, the referendum
exists solely as a complement to the system of representative democracy, in
which most major decisions are made by an elected legislature. An often cited
exception is the Swiss canton of Glarus, in which meetings are held on the
village lawn to decide on matters of public concern. In most jurisdictions that
practice them, referendums are relatively rare occurrences and are restricted
to important issues. Advocates of the referendum argue that certain decisions
are best taken out of the hands of representatives and determined directly by
the people. Some adopt a strict definition of democracy, saying elected
parliaments are a necessary expedient to make governance possible in the large,
modern nation-state, though direct democracy is nonetheless preferable and the
referendum takes precedence over Parliamentary decisions. Other advocates
insist that the principle of popular sovereignty demands that certain
foundational questions, such as the adoption or amendment of a constitution,
the secession of a state or the altering of national boundaries, be determined
with the directly expressed consent of the people. Advocates of representative
democracy say referendums are used by politicians to avoid making difficult or
controversial decisions. Criticism of populist aspect. Critics of the
referendum argue that voters in a referendum are more likely driven by
transient whims than careful deliberation, or that they are not sufficiently
informed to make decisions on complicated or technical issues. Also, voters
might be swayed by strong personalities, propaganda and expensive advertising
campaigns. James Madison argued that direct democracy is the "tyranny of the
majority." Some opposition to the referendum has arisen from its use by
dictators such as Adolf Hitler and Benito Mussolini who, it is argued, used the
plebiscite to disguise oppressive policies as populism. Hitler's use of
plebiscites is argued as reason why, since World War II, there has been no
provision in Germany for the holding of referendums at the federal level.
Never-end-um. A further perceived flaw of the referendum is that, in some
circumstances, the democratic spirit of the referendum may be flouted by the
repeated submission to the referendum of a proposal until it is eventually
endorsed, perhaps due to a low turn-out or public fatigue with the issue. This
is especially a problem where a proposal may be difficult to reverse, such as
secession from a larger country or the abolition of a monarchy. The repeated
holding of a referendum on a single issue has been pejoratively referred to as
a "never-end-um" by the academic Matt Qvortrup. Many critics of the EU point to
the Treaty of Nice's ratification procedure in Ireland, where the government
submitted the Treaty to a referendum twice, getting the required "Yes" vote on
the second attempt. This controversy was repeated during the ratification of
the Treaty of Lisbon. Closed questions and the separability problem. Some
critics of the referendum attack the use of closed questions. A difficulty
which can plague a referendum of two issues or more is called the separability
problem. If one issue is in fact, or in perception, related to another on the
ballot, the imposed simultaneous voting of first preference on each issue can
result in an outcome that is displeasing to most. Undue limitations on regular
government power. Several commentators have noted that the use of citizens'
initiatives to amend constitutions has so tied the government to a mishmash of
popular demands as to render the government unworkable. "The Economist" has
made this point about the US State of California, which has passed so many
referendums restricting the ability of the state government to tax the people
and pass the budget that the state has become effectively ungovernable. Calls
for an entirely new California constitution have been made.
