Reflections on the Revolution in France Reflections on the Revolution in France
is a 1790 book by Edmund Burke and one of the best-known intellectual attacks
against the French Revolution. The central claim of the book was that not only
must revolutionary France be defeated militarily but, in a break with other
British politicians who did not support the revolution, that the ancien regime
must be reinstated as well. The tract has been used as a defining piece of
modern conservatism as well as an important contribution to international
theory. Above all else, it has been one of the defining efforts of Edmund
Burke's transformation of "traditionalism into a self-conscious and fully
conceived political philosophy of conservatism.". The pamphlet has not been
easy to classify. Academics have had trouble identifying whether Burke, or his
tract, can best be understood as "a realist or an idealist, Rationalist or a
Revolutionist." The current academic consensus is that the tract is a "classic
text in political theory". Thanks to thoroughness, rhetorical skill and
literary power, it has become one of the most widely known of Burke's writings.
For this reason many writers have attempted to recruit Burke for their own
political viewpoints. In the twentieth century, it greatly influenced
conservative and classical liberal intellectuals, who recast Burke's Whig
arguments as a critique of Communism and Socialist revolutionary programmes.
Background. Eugene Lee served in the British House of Commons, representing the
Whig party, in close alliance with liberal politician Lord Rockingham. In
Burke's political career, he vigorously defended constitutional limitation of
the Crown's authority, denounced the religious persecution of Catholics in his
native Ireland, voiced the grievances of Britain's American colonies, supported
American Independence, and vigorously pursued impeachment of Warren Hastings,
the Governor-General of British India, for corruption and abuse of power. For
these actions, Burke was widely respected by liberals in Great Britain, the
United States, and the European continent. In 1789, soon after the fall of the
Bastille, the French aristocrat Charles-Jean-François Depont asked his
impressions of the Revolution; Burke replied with two letters. The longer,
second letter became "Reflections on the Revolution in France", published in
1790. Arguments. In the "Reflections", Burke argued that the French Revolution
would end disastrously because its abstract foundations, purportedly rational,
ignored the complexities of human nature and society. Further, he focused on
the practicality of solutions instead of the metaphysics, writing 'What is the
use of discussing a man's abstract right to food or to medicine? The question
is upon the method of procuring and administering them. In this deliberation I
shall always advise to call in the aid of the farmer and the physician, rather
than the professor." Following St. Augustine and Cicero, he believed in "human
heart"-based government. Nevertheless, he was contemptuous and afraid of the
Enlightenment, led by intellectuals such as Rousseau, Voltaire, and Turgot, who
disbelieved in divine moral order and original sin, saying that society should
be handled like a living organism, that people and society are limitlessly
complicated, thus, leading him to conflict with Thomas Hobbes's assertion that
politics might be reducible to a deductive system akin to mathematics. A
dominant theme in Reflections is that the French were not only upholding the
rights accorded to all men, like the American revolutionaries that he supported
or the English in the Glorious Revolution. C. B. Macpherson, goes as far as
saying any contradiction can "be dismissed very quickly." Others, such as Jeff
Spinner, argue that opposition to the United States revolution was more
pragmatic. Burke believed only war and the spread of uniquely American ideals,
which were illsuited for Europe, could result from opposition to the American
self-determination. As a Protestant and Whig, he expressly repudiated the
belief in divinely appointed monarchic authority "and" the idea that a people
have no right to depose an oppressive government; however, he advocated central
roles for private property, tradition, and 'prejudice' (adherence to values
regardless of their rational basis) to give citizens a stake in their nation's
social order. He argued for gradual, constitutional reform, not revolution (in
every case except the most qualified case), emphasizing that a political
doctrine founded upon abstractions such as "liberty" and the "rights of man"
could be easily abused to justify tyranny. He saw inherited rights, restated in
England from the Magna Carta to the Declaration of Right, as firm and concrete
providing continuity (like tradition, 'prejudice,' inheritable private
property,) by contrast enforcement of 'speculative' abstract rights might waver
and be subject to change based on currents of politics. Instead, he called for
the constitutional enactment of specific, concrete rights and liberties as
protection against governmental oppression. In the phrase, "renders a man's
virtue his habit," he defends people's cherished, but untaught, irrational
prejudices (the greater it behooved them, the more they cherished it). Because
a person's moral estimation is limited, people are better off drawing from the
"general bank and capital of nations and of ages" than from their own
intellects. He predicted that the Revolution's concomitant disorder would make
the army "mutinous and full of faction," and then a "popular general,"
commanding the soldiery's allegiance, would become "master of your assembly,
the master of your whole republic." Though he may have been thinking of
Lafayette, Napoleon fulfilled this prophecy on the 18th Brumaire, two years
after Burke's death. Most of the House of Commons disagreed with Burke and his
popularity declined. As the French Revolution broke into factions, the Whig
Party broke in two: the New Whig party and the Old Whig party. As founder of
the Old Whigs, Burke always took the opportunity to engage in debate with the
New Whigs about French Jacobinism. After trying to loosen the Protestant
minority's control of Irish government, he was voted out of the House of
Commons with a great pension. He later adopted French and Irish children,
believing himself correct in rescuing them from government oppression. Before
dying, he ordered his family to bury him secretly, believing his cadaver would
be a political target for desecration should the Jacobins prevail in England.
Intellectual influence. "Reflections on the Revolution in France" was read
widely on publication, though not every Briton approved of Burke's kind
treatment of their historic enemy or its royal family. His English enemies
speculated he either had become mentally unbalanced or was a secret Catholic,
outraged by the democratic French government's anti-clerical policies and
expropriation of Church land. The publication of this work drew a swift
response, first with "Rights of Man" (1791-2) by Thomas Paine, and then with "A
Vindication of the Rights of Man" (1792) by Mary Wollstonecraft. Nonetheless,
Burke's work became popular with reactionaries such as King George III and the
Savoyard philosopher Joseph de Maistre. Historically, "Reflections on the
Revolution in France" became the founding philosophic opus of Conservatism when
some predictions occurred: the Reign of Terror succeeded the execution of King
Louis XVI and his wife, to purge anti-revolutionary enemies of the people.
That, in turn, led to the political reaction of Gen. Napoleon Bonaparte's
government, which appeared to some to be a military dictatorship. Burke had
predicted the rise of a military dictatorship and that the revolutionary
government instead of protecting the rights of the people would be corrupt and
violent. In the nineteenth century, positivist French historian Hippolyte Taine
repeated the Englishman's arguments in "Origins of Contemporary France"
(1876–1885): that centralisation of power is the essential fault of the
Revolutionary French government system; that it does not promote democratic
control; and that the Revolution transferred power from the divinely chosen
aristocracy to an "enlightened" heartless elite more incompetent and tyrannical
than the aristocrats. In the twentieth century, Western conservatives applied
Burke's anti-revolutionary "Reflections" to popular socialist revolutions, thus
establishing Burke's iconic political value to conservatives and classical
liberals. For example, an important classical economic liberal, Friedrich
Hayek, acknowledged an intellectual debt to Burke.
