Reformism Reformism is the belief that gradual changes through and within
existing institutions of a society can ultimately change a society's
fundamental economic relations, economic system, and political structures. This
belief grew out of opposition to revolutionary socialism, which contends that
revolutions are necessary for fundamental structural changes to occur. History.
Socialist reformism, or evolutionary socialism, was first put forward by Eduard
Bernstein, a leading social democrat. Reformism was quickly targeted by
revolutionary socialists, with Rosa Luxemburg condemning Bernstein's
"Evolutionary Socialism" in her 1900 essay "Reform or Revolution?". While
Luxemburg died in the German Revolution, the reformists soon found themselves
contending with the Bolsheviks and their satellite communist parties for the
support of the proletariat. After the Bolsheviks won the Russian Civil War and
consolidated power in the Soviet Union, they launched a targeted campaign
against the Reformist movement by denouncing them as "social fascists".
According to "The God that Failed" by Arthur Koestler, a former member of the
Communist Party of Germany, the largest communist party in Western Europe in
the Interwar period, communists, aligned with the Soviet Union, continued to
consider the "social fascist" Social Democratic Party of Germany to be the real
enemy in Germany, even after the Nazi Party had gotten into power. In modern
times, Reformists are seen as centre-left. Some social democratic parties, such
as the Canadian NDP and the Social Democratic Party of Germany, are still
considered to be reformist. Reformism in the British Labour Party. The term was
applied to elements within the British Labour Party in the 1950s and
subsequently, on the party's right. Anthony Crosland wrote "The Future of
Socialism" (1956) as a personal manifesto arguing for a reformulation of the
term. For Crosland, the relevance of nationalization (or public ownership) for
socialists was much reduced as a consequence of contemporary full employment,
Keynesian management of the economy and reduced capitalist exploitation. In
1960, after the third successive defeat of his party in the 1959 General
Election Hugh Gaitskell attempted to reformulate the original wording of Clause
IV in the party's constitution, but proved unsuccessful. Some of the younger
followers of Gaitskell, principally Roy Jenkins, Bill Rodgers and Shirley
Williams left the Labour Party in 1981 to found the Social Democratic Party,
but the central objective of the Gaitskellites was eventually achieved by Tony
Blair in his successful attempt to rewrite Clause IV in 1995. The use of the
term is distinguished from the gradualism associated with Fabianism (the
ideology of the Fabian Society), which itself should not be seen as being in
parallel with the revisionism associated Bernstein and the Social Democratic
Party of Germany, as originally the Fabians had explicitly rejected Marxism.
