Refusal to serve in the Israeli military Refusal to serve in the Israeli
military includes both refusal to obey specific orders and refusal to serve in
the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) in any capacity due to pacifist or anti-
militarist views or disagreement with the policies of the Israeli government as
implemented by the army, such as the Disengagement plan or occupation of
Palestinian territory. In other cases the refusal is simply a result of youth
who are not interested in military service and wish to pursue other activities.
The conscientious objectors, i.e. the first category in the previous sentence,
who object to being drafted are sometimes called "sarvanim" (in Hebrew
◊°◊®◊ë◊ ◊ô◊ù) which is sometimes translated into the word "refuseniks", as well
as "mishtamtim" (evaders, dodgers). Overview. Although Israel has conscription,
many Israelis do not serve in the military for various reasons. Israeli Arabs
are not drafted, though they may enlist, and small numbers serve voluntarily.
Haredi Jews were exempt, so long as they did study in yeshivas (up to a maximum
of 62,500 individuals), based on an arrangement worked out with David Ben-
Gurion in 1948 and the Tal Law, though small numbers volunteer to serve in the
IDF, specially in the Netzah Yehuda Battalion. The exemption lapsed in August
1st, 2012, after being struck down by the Israeli Supreme Court in April 2012.
Orthodox women can avoid service on the basis of their religion upon filing
certain paperwork. After becoming officially exempt, religious women may choose
to do national service work instead, although this is not compulsory. Many
people who are "unfit" or "unqualified", either mentally or physically, are
also exempt. Military service can often be postponed for further
education‚Äîeither college or university, or technical studies. Finally, a
number of people refuse to serve because of pacifist views, or refuse certain
orders based on their disagreement with government policy. Some distinguish
between refusal to serve in the military because of a pacifist world view that
rejects any manifestation of violence and encompasses a refusal to submit to
compulsory military service in any form, and partial refusal to serve, such as
the Courage to Refuse group who "do their reserve duty wherever and whenever
they are summoned, but refuse to serve in the occupied territories." The
diverse range of opinions regarding the refusal to serve is the reason why
there is no single umbrella organization that encompasses all groups of
refusers. While most instances of refusal to serve have historically been found
among left-leaning Israelis, there is a rapidly expanding willingness among
right-wing soldiers to refuse orders to evict Jews from settlements in the West
Bank (and formerly in the Gaza Strip). Contemporary instances of refusal to
serve occur among individuals and in groups. Some claim that the rise in
instances of soldiers refusing to serve, as well as the gradual shift in public
opinion regarding the phenomenon, has been influenced by the growing
politicization of the IDF. In February 2004, Israeli Chief of Personnel Major-
General Gil Regev told a Knesset committee that the number of soldiers refusing
to serve in the territories had dramatically decreased in 2003 despite the
increase in the number of high-profile refusals. He said that eighteen reserve
soldiers and eight officers had been imprisoned for refusal in 2003 compared to
100 reservists and 29 officers in 2002, a decrease of 80%. Members of the
refusers' organization "Yesh Gvul" claimed in reply that actually 76 people,
including eleven officers, had been jailed for refusal in 2003. They also said
that 79 soldiers and eighteen officers had added their names to the "Courage to
Refuse" letter in 2003, and that the number of high-school "refuseniks" had
risen to 500. The first well-known instance of an individual refusing to serve
in the IDF occurred in 1954 when Amnon Zichroni, a lawyer, asked to be released
from military service as a pacifist. Initially, then Minister of Defense Pinhas
Lavon refused to release Zichroni, though he was eventually discharged from the
army reserves. Refusals actions and movements. Haredi Jews. Since the founding
of the State of Israel in 1948, many Haredi Jews refuse to serve in the Israeli
military for religious reasons. Typically they are learning Torah in yeshivas,
and as such are legally exempt from military service. Also refusing any Israeli
military service are people affiliated with various Hasidic groups (most
notably Satmar), the Brisk yeshivas, and the Neturei Karta. Most of these
groups are followers of the Edah HaCharedis. "Shministim". On April 28, 1970, a
group of high school seniors about to be drafted sent a letter to Prime
Minister Golda Meir expressing their reservation about the occupation of the
West Bank and Gaza, the War of Attrition and the government's failure to take
steps to avoid conflict. In 1987, a new group was formed, also made up of high
school students intent on refusing to serve in the Occupied Territories. They
gave themselves the name that the press used to dub the previous effort ‚Äì
'Shministim' (Hebrew: ◊©◊û◊ô◊ ◊ô◊°◊ò◊ô◊ù), literally "twelfth graders". In
2001, a high-school refusers movement ‚Äì also called "Shministim" followed in
their stead. Over 3,000 Israeli high school students are currently members of
Shministim. . A smaller number of them have also signed a public letter in
which they state their intent to refuse any service in the army. Such a
behaviour has usually resulted in repeated jail sentences of several weeks. One
of the most promiment "Shiministim" that went to jail is Omer Goldman. Her case
received special attention since her father used to be one of the highest
ranking Mossad officers. On December 18, 2008, a worldwide campaign was
launched in order to request the freedom of "Shministim", including the
delivery of more than forty thousand letters, to Israeli embassies, appealing
for the youngsters' cause. "Yesh Gvul". "Yesh Gvul" (Hebrew: ◊ô◊© ◊í◊ë◊ï◊ú, can
be translated as "there is a limit" or "the border exists") is a movement
founded in 1982 at the outbreak of the Lebanon War by reservists who refused to
serve in Lebanon. A petition, delivered to Prime Minister Menachem Begin and
Defense Minister Ariel Sharon was signed by 3,000 reservists, some of whom were
court martialed and served time in military prison for refusing to obey orders.
Currently it sees its main role as "backing soldiers who refuse duties of a
repressive or aggressive nature." It also engages in human rights activities,
such as petitioning British courts to issue arrest warrants for IDF officers
accused of human rights abuses and war crimes. The Adam Keller Court Martial.
In the Adam Keller Court Martial which drew considerable public attention in
April‚ÄìMay 1988, Reserve Corporal Adam Keller was charged with
"insubordination" and "spreading of propaganda harmful to military discipline"
in that while on active military duty he had written on 117 tanks and other
military vehicles graffiti with the text: "Soldiers of the IDF, refuse to be
occupiers and oppressors, refuse to serve in the occupied territories!" as well
as placing on electricity pylons in the military camp where he was
serving‚Äîand on inside doors of the stalls in the officers' toilet‚Äîstickers
with the slogans "Down with the occupation!". Keller was convicted and
sentenced to three months imprisonment‚Äîconsidered a relatively mild sentence,
as the maximum penalty could have been six years, three for each of the
charges. Keller was an active member of Yesh Gvul, but declared that he had
done his act on his own without consulting anybody else. For its part, the
movement did not take responsibility for his act, but did provide his wife with
the monetary support given to the families of refusers. "Courage to Refuse". In
January 2002, 51 reserve soldiers and officers signed a "Combat Troops' Letter"
or "Combatants' Letter" in which they declared their refusal ""to fight beyond
the 1967 borders in order to dominate, expel, starve and humiliate an entire
people."" They established the group, Ometz Le'sarev, which distinguishes
itself by using conspicuously Zionist discourse: ""Refusal to serve in the
Territories is Zionism."" 633 combatants from all units of the IDF and from all
sectors of the Israeli society have since signed the letter. "New Profile". New
Profile is a movement for the civilianization of Israeli society. It's a
voluntary organization that acts against the compulsory law of enlistment and
supports people who refuse to enlist in the Israeli army. New Profile is a
feminist organization and most of its activists are women. The pilots' letter.
In response, the Chief of Staff announced that the pilots would be grounded and
will no longer be allowed to train cadets in the country's flight school. In
response to their letter, hundreds of IAF pilots signed a petition denouncing
the pilots' letter and their refusal to serve. Because of the harsh response,
several of the pilots who originally signed the letter reneged and removed
their signatures; after more than 30 signed, four later recanted. One, an El Al
pilot, was threatened with dismissal and another lost his civilian job. The
commandos' letter. The letter, released just three months after the Pilots'
Letter, was condemned sharply by politicians on both the right and the left of
the Israeli political spectrum. Defense Minister Shaul Mofaz claimed that the
soldiers were exploiting the reputation of their unit in order to attack the
government's policies. Mateh Chomat Magen (civilian group). There are some
Israeli rabbis, former generals and public figures who call on soldiers to
refuse orders to dismantle Israeli settlements and remove their residents. One
of those who call soldiers to refuse removal order is Uri Elitzur, a publicist
and former civil servant. Eliztur claims that settlers-removal order is an
illegal order, and therefore soldiers must refuse to obey it. He used the
Hebrew term ◊§◊ß◊ï◊ì◊î ◊ë◊ú◊™◊ô ◊ó◊ï◊ß◊ô◊™ ◊ë◊¢◊ú◊ô◊ú (literally, a clearly
illegal order), which is a judicial term for an order that a soldier "must"
refuse, coined in relation to the Kafr Qasim massacre. He used a Yossi Sarid (a
left-wing politician, Yachad) quotation that an order to transfer Palestinians
should be resisted by any means, as a legitimation to a total and even semi-
violent resistance against transfer of settlers. Elitzur's and others calls to
refusal were condemned by some of the settlements' Rabbis and by the settlers
leadership, including senior right wing politicians such as Effi Eitam of Ahi.
On June 2004, MKs Effi Eitam and Aryeh Eldad (National Union) initiated a law
bill called "Unity of the Military Law". The law says that only Israeli police
(including Border Police) officers could engage in the removal of Jewish
settlements, and soldiers could not. In 2005, as a reaction to the Israel's
unilateral disengagement plan, a group called "Mateh Chomat Magen" (the name
referring to Operation Defensive Shield) published a letter with 10,000
signatures of soldiers who signed a petition saying that they would refuse to
uproot and remove Israeli settlements. The group now claims to have gathered
over 30,000 signatures. Celebrities. The draft-dodgers also include the cases
of celebrity draft-evaders whose avoidance of military service (not
conscientious objection) and alternative national service allows them to
further their careers. A 2007 incident that garnered international headlines
focused on revelations in the press that Israeli "Sports Illustrated Swimsuit
Issue" cover model Bar Refaeli had married a family friend in 2004 and divorced
him soon after in order to avoid military service. Refaeli received widespread
criticism, including from the Israeli Forum for the Promotion of Equal Share,
to which she responded, "I really wanted to serve in the IDF, but I don't
regret not enlisting, because it paid off big time. That's just the way it is,
celebrities have other needs. I hope my case has influenced the army." In a
compromise to avoid potential boycotts of companies Refaeli works with, she
agreed to visit injured IDF soldiers on visits to Israel and encourage
enlistment in the army. The incident made headlines again in October 2009 when
fellow Israeli model Esti Ginzburg criticized Refaeli in an interview with
Israeli newspaper "Yedioth Ahronoth", reigniting arguments over the ease with
which conscription can be dodged. Reaction to the conscientious objectors.
Almost all the political factions in Israel have condemned refusal to serve on
ideological grounds, using terms such as "dangerous" and "undemocratic". The
conscientious objectors, or refuseniks as they call themselves, found support
within left-wing and the Arab parties, Hadash, Balad, Raam and parts of Meretz
(Zehava Galon, Roman Bronfman and Shulamit Aloni). The Israeli Labor Party and
other Meretz members have condemned the refuseniks and said that although their
protests against the occupation are justified and understandable, the means
they are taking to manifest it are wrong. Some major left-wing politicians
expressed the fear that left-oriented refusal to serve in the territories will
lend legitimacy to right-oriented refusal to remove settlements. Right wing
politicians have claimed that the refuseniks' actions are helping the enemies
of Israel in their anti-Israeli incitement. Some have even accused the
refuseniks of treason during war-time. This viewpoint was given some support
when the book "The Seventh War", by Avi Yisacharov and Amos Harel was published
in 2004; it contains extensive interviews with Hamas leaders, at least one of
whom explicitly stated that the actions of the commandos' and pilots' letters
encouraged to promote and continue the use of suicide bombers. The Israeli High
Court of Justice ruled in 2002 that refusal to serve was legal on the grounds
of unqualified pacifism, but "selective refusal" which accepted some duties and
not others was illegal. The court said that allowing selective refusal would
"weaken the ties that bind us as a nation". The court also said that the
refusal to serve in the territories is selective refusal and not conscientious
objection. From 1998 to 2000, 9.5% of applicants who filed for an exemption
from service for conscientious reasons were granted it. On January 4, 2004, a
military tribunal imposed one-year prison terms on five young activists who
refused to enlist in the IDF. The court accepted that the five acted in
accordance with their conscience but "ruled that they did not refuse to serve
as individuals, but rather as a group, with the explicit goal of bringing about
a change in Israeli policy in the territories. As such, the court ruled, their
action strayed from the norms of classic conscientious objection into the realm
of civil disobedience" (Haaretz).
