Regionalism (politics) In politics, regionalism is a political ideology that
focuses on the interests of a particular region or group of regions, whether
traditional or formal (political divisions, administrative divisions, country
subdivisions or subnational units). Regionalists aim at increasing their
region's influence and political power, either through movements for limited
form of autonomy (devolution, states' rights, decentralization) or through
stronger measures for a greater degree of autonomy (sovereignty, separatism,
independence). Regionalists often favor loose federations or confederations
over a unitary state with a strong central government. Proponents of
regionalism say that strengthening a region's governing bodies and political
powers within a larger country would promote fiscal responsibility, develop a
more rational allocation of the region's resources for the benefit of the local
populations, increase the efficient implementation of local plans, raise
competitiveness and efficiency levels among the regions and ultimately the
whole country, and save taxpayers money. For its opponents, regionalism is
associated with denying or preventing universalism. Regionalist and regional
parties. A regionalist party is a regional political party promoting autonomy
for its region; a regional party is a political party with its base almost
entirely in a single region. All regionalist parties are also regional, while
only a portion of regional parties are also regionalist. Because regional
parties often cannot receive enough votes or legislative seats to be
politically powerful, they may join political coalitions or seek to be part of
a coalition government. Examples of regionalist parties include the New Flemish
Alliance in Belgium, the Scottish National Party and Plaid Cymru in the United
Kingdom, Lega Nord, the Sardinian Action Party, the Party of the Sicilians,
and, to some extent, the South Tyrolean People's Party and the Valdotanian
Union in Italy, Convergence and Union and the Basque Nationalist Party in
Spain, the Party of the Corsican Nation in France, and the Regionalist Action
Party in Chile (northern parts). Examples of regional parties include the
aforementioned regionalist parties, many political parties in India, virtually
all the parties in Belgium, the Christian Social Union of Bavaria in Germany,
the Istrian Democratic Assembly and the Alliance of Primorje-Gorski Kotar in
Croatia. Regionalism, autonomism, nationalism. Regionalism, autonomism and
nationalism are interrelated concepts, yet they have different and sometimes
opposite meanings. For instance, in some contexts (e.g. Spain) regionalism is
associated with nationalism, while in others (e.g. Italy) it is considered its
opposite. In the Italian context, due to the peculiar political use made by
Lega Nord, federalism is often treated as a synonym of autonomism, while it is
generally considered quite a separate concept everywhere else. That said,
regionalism may or may not include autonomism. Examples of autonomist parties
are the already mentioned Lega Nord in Northern Italy, the Action démocratique
du Québec in Quebec (Canada), the New Macau Association in Macau (China), the
Martinican Progressive Party in Martinique and the Communist Party of Réunion
Réunion (both in France), and the New Progressive Party of Puerto Rico and the
Popular Democratic Party of Puerto Rico in Puerto Rico (United States). One
must distinguish also between regionalist/autonomist parties which support
autonomy (or, at times, federal reform) and nationalist/separatist movements
which support outright independence. The latter category includes all the
national liberation movements (as the Palestine Liberation Organization in
Palestine, the Polisario Front in the Western Sahara territory of Morocco, the
National Movement for the Liberation of Azawad in Azawad territory of Mali, and
the Front for the Liberation of the Enclave of Cabinda in the Cabinda Province
of Angola) and some parties in Western democratic countries as well (as the New
Flemish Alliance and Vlaams Belang in Flanders, the Basque Nationalist Party
and Euskal Herria Bildu in the Basque Country, the Republican Left of Catalonia
in the Spanish autonomous community of Catalonia and the Scottish National
Party in Scotland. At Lega Nord has been separatist too and still includes
separatist factions and people. In some countries, the development of
regionalist politics may be a prelude to further demands for greater autonomy
or even full separation, especially when ethnic and cultural disparities are
present. This was demonstrated, among other examples, in the Socialist Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia in the late 1980s and early 1990s.
