Religious Coalition for Reproductive Choice The Religious Coalition for
Reproductive Choice (RCRC) was founded in 1973 by clergy and lay leaders from
mainline denominations and faith traditions to provide interfaith support for
the new constitutional right to privacy in decisions about abortion. In 1993,
the original name - the Religious Coalition for Abortion Rights (RCAR) - was
changed to the Religious Coalition for Reproductive Choice to reflect the
expansion of the coalition's work. State affiliates. The state affiliates and
state networks of the Religious Coalition are involved in advocacy, education,
community service, and implementing RCRC programs such as Clergy for Choice,
All Options Clergy Counseling, and Spiritual Youth for Reproductive Freedom at
the community and state level. History. In the 1960s, clergy who counseled
women concerned about an unintended pregnancy were increasingly horrified by
the injury and death being suffered by women undergoing illegal abortions. They
became convinced of their moral responsibility to help women with unwelcome
pregnancies locate safe abortion providers. In 1967, Reverend Howard Moody and
Arlene Carmen organized the first Clergy Consultation Service on Abortion, at
Judson Memorial Church in New York City. The service was a network of clergy
who counseled women and identified safe abortion providers. Similar services
developed throughout the country. Simultaneously, Protestant denominations and
other religious organizations were working to pass their own policies
supporting decriminalization of abortion and collectively lobbying for
decriminalization legislation. They were convinced that religious freedom
required reproductive freedom. They consistently pointed out that where
religions disagree, no one religious view should be legislated. Even when the
U.S. Supreme Court recognized that the right to privacy encompassed a woman’s
decision about abortion in its 1973 "Roe v. Wade" decision, denominations and
faith groups that had worked so hard for legalization knew the struggle had not
ended. They founded the Religious Coalition for Abortion Rights (RCAR) that
year to provide interfaith support for women's right to choose abortion. The
original intent was to focus primarily on abortion and the issue of separation
of church and state. Local affiliates were established in key states to block
an anticipated constitutional amendment to counter the guarantees of the "Roe
v. Wade" decision. However, the need for interfaith support for reproductive
rights has continued and even intensified and RCRC has accordingly expanded.
1985—Women of Color Partnership Established. The Women of Color Partnership
(WOCP) was formed to provide a vehicle through which women of color could
become actively involved as decision-makers in the reproductive choice
movement. The WOCP sought to identify and address reproductive health care
concerns from the perspectives of women of color, thereby building a
multicultural and anti-racist alliance. 1993—Mission Expanded. Largely at the
urging of women of color and others who wanted a more inclusive agenda, the
Coalition expanded its mission to reflect its commitment to all reproductive
options, including sexuality education, access to affordable family planning,
adequate health care, and other reproductive health concerns. To reflect the
expanded mission, the name was changed to the Religious Coalition for
Reproductive Choice. Today, the Coalition pursues a reproductive justice
agenda, supporting policies to ensure the medical, economic, and educational
resources that make reproductive choice possible. 1996 – Coalition Programs
Expanded. Growth has been rapid since 1996, when the National Black Church
Initiative was launched. In 1998, two new departments were established—-Field
Services (now Interfaith Outreach) and MultiCultural Programs. The same year,
the Board of Directors established the Council of Governors, a body that
extends the Coalition’s reach by expanding partnerships and collaborative
opportunities. In 2000, the Coalition responded to the call for more religious
involvement in HIV/AIDS prevention by beginning to work with South African
churches. The Coalition’s program for youth and young adults, Spiritual Youth
for Reproductive Freedom, began in 2000 to reach out to the growing number of
youth whose commitment to social justice is based on deeply held faith
principles. An educational program with Latino churches, La Iniciativa Latina,
was started in 2001. In 2002, Seminarians for Choice was launched nationally.
The Coalition’s Public Policy Department began in 2007 to provide a dedicated
focus on legislation and policy issues; its early projects included increasing
interfaith support for comprehensive, medically accurate sexuality education.
