Rent strike A rent strike is a method of protest commonly employed against
large landlords. In a rent strike, a group of tenants come together and agree
to refuse to pay their rent "en masse" until a specific list of demands is met
by the landlord. This can be a useful tactic of final resort for use against
intransigent landlords, but carries the obvious risk of eviction in some cases.
Historically, rent strikes have often been used in response to problems such as
high rents, poor conditions in the property, or unreasonable tenancy demands;
however, there have been situations where wider issues have led to such action.
Another type of collective action concerning rental property is a "landlords'
strike," which is undertaken by a group of landlords. Such an action would be
most likely to be undertaken when government tenancy policies (or enforcement
thereof) are perceived to be patently unfair to the landlords. The most common
means of action in this case would entail the landlords collectively refusing
to rent out any vacant and soon-to-be-vacated properties, in hopes of provoking
a massive housing shortage that would quickly compel the government to change
the relevant policies. Examples of Rent Strikes. EUROPE Glasgow During the
Irish Land War of the 1880s and during World War I when the landlords of
tenement buildings in Glasgow sought to take advantage of the influx of
shipbuilders coming into the city and the absence of many local men to raise
rents on the tenements' remaining residents. These women left behind were seen
as an easy target and were faced with a rent increase of up to 25% and would be
forcibly evicted by bailiffs if they failed to pay. As a result of this rent
increase, there was a popular backlash against the landlords and a rent strike
was initiated. This was led by Mary Barbour, who with her "army" would forcibly
prevent the bailiffs from entering the tenements and would pelt them with flour
bombs. The strikes soon spread and became such an overwhelming success, moving
out from Glasgow and on to other cities throughout the UK, that the government,
on 27 November 1915, introduced legislation to restrict rents to the pre-war
level. The Leeds rent strike in 1914 In early January 1914, around 300 tenants
living in the Burley area of Leeds went on rent strike against a 6d increase in
rents imposed by the landlords. The rent increase had been called for by the
Leeds branch of the Property Owners Association. At a mass meeting of the
tenants on Sunday January 10, the rent strike organisers called for a city-wide
protest against the increase. A week later, the Leeds Trades Council hosted a
Labour conference intended to organise mass rent resistance. A Tenants Defence
League was formed with a central committee of nine and a mission to spread the
rent campaign across the city through a series of public meetings and
neighbourhood canvassing. The strike lasted eight weeks. In the end, committee
members had been evicted and blacklisted from renting any other home in the
area. Highland Land League Scotland 1880's Barcelona mass rent strike 1931
between 5,000 and 100,000 people were out on rent strike Northern Ireland
During "the troubles" (1960's-1980's) in Northern Ireland, participants in the
Civil Rights movement withheld rent and council rates from local councils in
protest at internment. AFRICA South Africa massive rent strikes 1980's to end
Apartheid and gain ownership of housing by the tenants. The government sent in
troops in Soweto in 1987. "Residents of some public housing have not paid their
rents in several years, and in many cases officials have stopped trying to
collect and have turned ownership over to tenants. In Soweto, for instance,
Government officials say at least 50,000 rental units have been given to
tenants." NORTH AMERICA Anti-Rent Movement New York 1839-1850's New York City
Rent Strike in 1907 In 1907, in response to rising rents due to housing
shortages 10,000 families in lower Manhattan went on rent strike. One of the
primary organizers was 16-year-old Pauline Newman, housewives and women working
in the garment industry. It lasted from December 26 until January 9 and led to
about 2,000 families in having their rents reduced. New York City rent strike
over repairs In the winter of 1963-1964, a rent strike erupted in Harlem. It
was led by Jesse Gray, a tenant organizer there since 1953. The focus of the
strike was not rent levels but poor maintenance.
