Representative agent Economists use the term representative agent to refer to
the typical decision-maker of a certain type (for example, the typical
consumer, or the typical firm). More technically, an economic model is said to
have a representative agent if all agents of the same type are identical. Also,
economists sometimes say a model has a representative agent when agents differ,
but act in such a way that the sum of their choices is mathematically
equivalent to the decision of one individual or many identical individuals.
This occurs, for example, when preferences are Gorman aggregable. A model that
contains many different agents whose choices cannot be aggregated in this way
is called a heterogeneous agent model. The notion of the representative agent
can be traced back to the late 19th century. Francis Edgeworth (1881) used the
term "representative particular", while Alfred Marshall (1890) introduced a
"representative firm" in his "Principles of Economics". However, after Robert
Lucas, Jr.'s critique of econometric policy evaluation spurred the development
of microfoundations for macroeconomics, the notion of the representative agent
became more prominent and more controversial. Many macroeconomic models today
are characterized by an explicitly stated optimization problem of the
representative agent, which may be either a consumer or a producer (or,
frequently, both types of representative agents are present). The derived
individual demand or supply curves are then used as the corresponding aggregate
demand or supply curves. Motivation. When economists study a representative
agent, this is because it is usually simpler to consider to one 'typical'
decision maker instead of simultaneously analyzing many different decisions. Of
course, economists must abandon the representative agent assumption when
differences between individuals are central to the question at hand. For
example, a macroeconomist might analyze the impact of a rise of oil prices on a
typical 'representative' consumer; but some analyses of auctions involve
heterogeneous agent models because competing potential buyers can value the
good differently. Hartley (1997) discusses the reasons for the prominence of
representative agent modelling in contemporary macroeconomics. The Lucas
critique (1976) pointed out that policy recommendations based on observed past
macroeconomic relationships may neglect subsequent behavioral changes by
economic agents, which, when added up, would change the macroeconomic
relationships themselves. He argued that this problem would be avoided in
models that explicitly described the decision-making situation of the
individual agent. In such a model, an economist could analyze a policy change
by recalculating the decision problem of each agent under the new policy, then
aggregating these decisions to calculate the macroeconomic effects of the
change. Lucas' influential argument convinced many macroeconomists to build
microfounded models of this kind. However, this was technically more difficult
than earlier modelling strategies. Therefore, almost all the earliest general
equilibrium macroeconomic models were simplified by assuming that consumers
and/or firms could be described as a representative agent. General equilibrium
models with many heterogeneous agents are much more complex, and are therefore
still a relatively new field of economic research. Critique. Hartley, however,
finds these reasons for representative agent modelling unconvincing. Kirman
(1992), too, is critical of the representative agent approach in economics.
Because representative agent models simply ignore valid aggregation concerns,
they sometimes commit the so-called fallacy of composition. He provides an
example in which the representative agent disagrees with all individuals in the
economy. Policy recommendations to improve the welfare of the representative
agent would be illegitimate in this case. Kirman concludes that the reduction
of a group of heterogeneous agents to a representative agent is not just an
analytical convenience, but it is ""both unjustified and leads to conclusions
which are usually misleading and often wrong."" In his view, the representative
agent ""deserves a decent burial, as an approach to economic analysis that is
not only primitive, but fundamentally erroneous."" A possible alternative to
the representative agent approach to economics could be agent-based simulation
models which are capable of dealing with many heterogeneous agents. Another
alternative is to construct dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE)
models with heterogeneous agents, which is difficult, but is becoming more
common (Ríos-Rull, 1995; Heathcote, Storesletten, and Violante 2009; Canova
2007 section 2.1.2). Chang, Kim, and Schorfheide (2011) make a point similar to
that of Kirman, in the context of a DSGE model where agents are heterogeneous
because of uninsured labor income risk. They estimate a representative-agent
DSGE model on the basis of the aggregate data implied by their heterogeneous-
agent economy, and show that the estimated coefficients are inconsistent with
the true parameters of the heterogeneous economy. They point out that
