Republican In Name Only Republican In Name Only is a pejorative term that
refers to a member of the Republican Party of the United States whose political
views or actions are considered insufficiently conservative or otherwise
conforming to liberal positions. The acronym RINO, emerging in the 1990s, is a
charge used in campaigns by Republican conservatives against party moderates
and liberals. Origins. In 1912, former President Theodore Roosevelt, then-
President William Howard Taft, and Senator Robert LaFollette fought for
ideological control of the Republican Party and each denounced the other two as
"not really Republican". The phrase "Republican in name only" emerged as a
popular political pejorative in the 1920s, 1950s and 1980s. The earliest known
print appearance of the term "RINO" was in the Manchester, New Hampshire
newspaper then called "The Union Leader". featuring the red slash through an
image of a rhinoceros were spotted in the New Hampshire State House as early as
1992. In 1993, former Marine and future California Republican Assembly
President Celeste Greig distributed buttons featuring a red slash over the word
"RINO" to express opposition to Los Angeles mayor Richard Riordan. The term
came into widespread usage during the 2000 election campaigns. Usage. During
Republican primary campaign season, some conservative organizations classify as
"RINO"'s Republicans who fail to adopt their right-wing stances. National
Federation of Republican Assemblies started the "RINO Hunters' Club", which
targets candidates soft on taxes, gun rights, and abortion. The anti-tax group
Club for Growth (which supports the National Federation of Republican
Assemblies) invented the "RINO Watch" list to monitor "Republican office
holders around the nation who have advanced egregious anti-growth, anti-freedom
or anti-free market policies"; other conservative groups published similar
lists. Similar terms. While the term "RINO" is of recent coinage, the concept
of being an inauthentic member of the Republican Party by not representing its
more conservative faction is a recurring theme in Party history. Me-too
Republicans. In the 1930s and 40s, "Me-too Republicans" described those who ran
on a platform of agreeing with the Democratic Party, proclaiming only minor or
moderating differences. An example is two-time presidential candidate Thomas E.
Dewey, who ran against the popular Franklin D. Roosevelt and his successor
Harry Truman. Dewey did not oppose Roosevelt's New Deal programs altogether,
but merely campaigned on the promise that Republicans would run them more
efficiently and less corruptly. From 1936 to 1976, the more centrist members of
the Republican Party frequently won the national nomination with candidates
such as Alf Landon, Wendell Willkie, Thomas E. Dewey, Dwight D. Eisenhower,
Richard Nixon, and Gerald Ford. The mainstream of the Republican Party was
generally supportive of the New Deal, and the right wing was the more
marginalized faction. In the 1950s, conservatives such as Robert Taft and Barry
Goldwater, who rallied against "me-too Republicans", were considered outside of
the mainstream of the then-centrist GOP; serious consideration was given to
leaving the GOP and forming a new conservative party in cooperation with
conservative Democrats. Nixonians, and Rockefeller Republicans. In the 1960s
and 70s, conservatives sometimes called moderate Republicans "Nixonian". A more
widely adopted term was "Rockefeller Republican". Neither expression was always
considered pejorative.
