Republicanism Republicanism is the ideology of governing a nation as a
republic, where the head of state is appointed by means other than heredity,
often through elections. The exact meaning of republicanism varies depending on
the cultural and historical context. The term "republic" may indicate 'rule by
many people and by law', as opposed to monarchy, or arbitrary rule by one
person. By this definition, dictatorial states are not republics, whereas,
according to some such as Kant, constitutional monarchies may be. Kant
preferred republicanism to pure democracy, on the grounds that the latter may
be the unrestricted rule of the majority, unrestrained by law. Historical
development of republicanism. Antique antecedents. Ancient Greece. In Ancient
Greece, several philosophers and historians analysed and described classical
republicanism. Some scholars have translated the Greek concept of "politeia" as
"republic," but most modern scholars reject this idea. There is no single
written expression or definition from this era that exactly corresponds with a
modern understanding of the term "republic." However, most of the essential
features of the modern definition are present in the works of Plato, Aristotle,
and Polybius. These include theories of mixed government and of civic virtue.
Plato's dialogue on the ideal state, "The Republic", is misnamed by the
standards of modern political theory. A number of Ancient Greek states such as
Athens and Sparta have been classified as classical republics, though this uses
a definition of republic that was not developed until much later. Plato
considered Carthage to have been a republic as it had a political system
similar to that of the Greek cities. Ancient Rome. Both Livy (in Latin, living
in Augustus' time) and Plutarch (in Greek, a century later), described how Rome
had developed its legislation, notably the transition from a "kingdom" to a
"republic", by following the example of the Greeks. Some of this history,
composed more than 500 years after the events, with scant written sources to
rely on, may be fictitious reconstruction - nonetheless the influence of Greek
ideas on governance is evident in the organisation of the Roman Republic. The
Greek historian Polybius, writing more than a century before Livy, became one
of the first to describe the emergence of the Roman Empire. Polybius exerted a
great influence on Cicero as he wrote his politico-philosophical works in the
1st century BC. In one of these works, "De re publica", Cicero linked the Roman
concept of "res publica" to the Greek "politeia". However, the modern term
"republic", despite its derivation, is not synonymous with the Roman "res
publica". Among the several meanings of the term "res publica", it is most
often translated "republic" where the Latin expression refers to the Roman
state, and its form of government, between the era of the Kings and the era of
the Emperors. This Roman Republic would, by a modern understanding of the word,
still be defined as a true republic, even if not coinciding entirely. Thus,
although Enlightenment philosophers saw the Roman Republic as an ideal system,
it included no systematic separation of powers, and depended on slave labor.
Romans still called their state "Res Publica" in the era of the early emperors.
Because, on the surface, the organization of the state had been preserved by
the first emperors without significant alteration. Several offices from the
republican era, held by individuals, were combined under the control of a
single person. These changes became permanent, and gradually conferred
sovereignty on the Emperor. Cicero's description of the ideal state, in "De re
publica", does not equate to a modern day "republic"; it is more like
enlightened absolutism. His philosophical works were influential when
Enlightenment philosophers such as Voltaire developed their political concepts.
In its classical meaning, a republic was any established governed political
community. Both Plato and Aristotle saw three types of government: democracy,
aristocracy, and monarchy. However, mixed government was considered ideal.
First Plato and Aristotle, and then Polybius and Cicero, developed the notion
that the ideal republic is a mixture of these three forms of government. The
writers of the Renaissance embraced this notion. Cicero expressed reservations
concerning the republican form of government. In his "theoretical" works he
defended monarchy, or at least a mixed monarchy/oligarchy and, in his own
political life, he generally opposed men trying to realise such ideals, like
Julius Caesar, Mark Antony and Octavian. Eventually, that opposition led to his
death and Cicero can be seen as a victim of his own republican ideals. Tacitus,
a contemporary of Plutarch, was not concerned with whether a form of government
could be analysed as a "republic" or a "monarchy". He analyzed how the powers
accumulated by the early Julio-Claudian dynasty were all given by a State that
was still notionally a republic. Nor was the Roman Republic "forced" to give
away these powers: it did so freely and reasonably, certainly in Augustus'
case, because of his many services to the state, freeing it from civil wars and
disorder. Tacitus was one of the first to ask whether such powers were given to
the head of state, because the citizens wanted to give them, or whether they
were given for other reasons (for example, because one had a deified ancestor).
The latter case led more easily to abuses of power. In Tacitus' opinion, the
trend away from a true republic was "irreversible" only when Tiberius
established power, shortly after Augustus' death in AD 14 (much later than most
historians place the start of the Imperial form of government in Rome). By this
time, too many principles defining some powers as "untouchable" had been
implemented. Renaissance republicanism. In Europe, republicanism was revived in
the late Middle Ages when a number of small states embraced a republican system
of government. These were generally small, but wealthy, trading states in which
the merchant class had risen to prominence. Haakonssen notes that by the
Renaissance Europe was divided, such that those states controlled by a landed
elite were monarchies, and those controlled by a commercial elite were
republics. These included the Italian city states of Florence and Venice and
members of the Hanseatic League. Building upon concepts of medieval feudalism,
Renaissance scholars used the ideas of the ancient world to advance their view
of an ideal government. Thus the republicanism developed during the Renaissance
is known as 'classical republicanism' because it relied on classical models.
This terminology was developed by Zera Fink in the 1960s but some modern
scholars, such as Brugger, consider it confuses the "classical republic" with
the system of government used in the ancient world. 'Early modern
republicanism' has been proposed as an alternative term. It is also sometimes
called civic humanism. Beyond simply a non-monarchy, early modern thinkers
conceived of an "ideal" republic, in which mixed government was an important
element, and the notion that virtue and the common good were central to good
government. Republicanism also developed its own distinct view of liberty.
Renaissance authors that spoke highly of republics were rarely critical of
monarchies. While Niccolò Machiavelli's "Discourses on Livy" is the period's
key work on republics, he also wrote "The Prince" on how best to run a
monarchy. The early modern writers did not see the republican model as
universally applicable; most thought that it could be successful only in very
small and highly urbanized city-states. Jean Bodin in "Six Books of the
Commonwealth" identified monarchy with republic. Classical writers like
Tacitus, and Renaissance writers like Machiavelli, tried to avoid an outspoken
preference for one government system or another. Enlightenment philosophers, on
the other hand, expressed a clear opinion. Thomas More, writing before the Age
of Enlightenment, was too outspoken for the reigning king's taste, even though
he coded his political preferences in a Utopian allegory. In England a type of
republicanism evolved that was not wholly opposed to monarchy; thinkers such as
Thomas More and Sir Thomas Smith saw a monarchy, firmly constrained by law, as
compatible with republicanism. Dutch Republic. Anti-monarchism became more
strident in the Dutch Republic during and after the Eighty Years' War, which
began in 1568. This anti-monarchism was more propaganda than a political
philosophy; most of the anti-monarchist works appeared in the form of widely
distributed pamphlets. This evolved into a systematic critique of monarchy,
written by men such as Johan Uytenhage de Mist, Radboud Herman Scheel, Lieven
de Beaufort and the brothers Johan and Peter de la Court. These writers saw all
monarchies as illegitimate tyrannies that were inherently corrupt. These
authors were more concerned with preventing the position of Stadholder from
evolving into a monarchy, than with attacking their former rulers. Dutch
republicanism also influenced on French Huguenots during the Wars of Religion.
In the other states of early modern Europe republicanism was more moderate.
Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth. In the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth
republicanism was an influential ideology. After the establishment of the
Commonwealth of Two Nations, republicans supported the status quo, of having a
very weak monarch, and opposed those who thought a stronger monarchy was
needed. These mostly Polish republicans, such as Łukasz Górnicki, Andrzej
Wolan, and Stanisław Konarski, were well read in classical and Renaissance
texts and firmly believed that their state was a republic on the Roman model,
and started to call their state the Rzeczpospolita. Atypically, Polish-
Lithuanian republicanism was not the ideology of the commercial class, but
rather of the landed aristocracy, which would lose power if the monarchy were
expanded. This resulted in an oligarchy of the great magnates. Enlightenment
republicanism. England. Oliver Cromwell set up a republic called the
Commonwealth of England (1649–1660) and ruled as a near dictator after the
overthrow of King Charles I. James Harrington was then a leading philosopher of
republicanism. The collapse of the Commonwealth of England in 1660 and the
restoration of the monarchy under Charles II discredited republicanism among
England's ruling circles. However they welcomed the liberalism, and emphasis on
rights, of John Locke, which played a major role in the Glorious Revolution of
1688. Even so, republicanism flourished in the "country" party of the early
18th century, which denounced the corruption of the "court" party, producing a
political theory that heavily influenced the American colonists. In general the
English ruling classes of the 18th century vehemently opposed republicanism,
typified by the attacks on John Wilkes, and especially on the American
Revolution and the French Revolution. French and Swiss thought. French and
Swiss Enlightenment thinkers, such as Montesquieu and later Rousseau, expanded
upon and altered the ideas of what an ideal republic should be: some of their
new ideas were scarcely traceable to antiquity or the Renaissance thinkers.
Concepts they contributed, or heavily elaborated, were social contract,
positive law, and mixed government. They also borrowed from, and distinguished
republicanism from, the ideas of liberalism that were developing at the same
time. Liberalism and republicanism were frequently conflated during this
period, because they were both opposed to absolute monarchy. Modern scholars
see them as two distinct streams that both contributed to the democratic ideals
of the modern world. An important distinction is that, while republicanism
continued to stress the importance of civic virtue and the common good,
liberalism was based on economics and individualism. It is clearest in the
matter of private property which, according to some, may be maintained only
under protection of established positive law. Jules Ferry, Prime Minister of
France from 1880 to 1885, followed both these schools of thought and eventually
enacted the Ferry Laws which were intended to overturn the Falloux Laws, by
embracing the anti-clerical thinking of the "Philosophs". These laws ended the
Catholic Church's involvement with many government institutions in late 19th-
century France, including schools. Republicanism in the United States. In
recent years a debate has developed over the role of republicanism in the
American Revolution and in the British radicalism of the 18th century. For many
decades the consensus was that liberalism, especially that of John Locke, was
paramount and that republicanism had a distinctly secondary role. The new
interpretations were pioneered by J.G.A. Pocock who argued in "The
Machiavellian Moment" (1975) that, at least in the early 18th century,
republican ideas were just as important as liberal ones. Pocock's view is now
widely accepted. Bernard Bailyn and Gordon Wood pioneered the argument that the
American founding fathers were more influenced by republicanism than they were
by liberalism. Cornell University professor Isaac Kramnick, on the other hand,
argues that Americans have always been highly individualistic and therefore
Lockean. The Whig canon and the neo-Harringtonians, John Milton, James
Harrington and Sidney, Trenchard, Gordon and Bolingbroke, together with the
Greek, Roman, and Renaissance masters of the tradition as far as Montesquieu,
formed the authoritative literature of this culture; and its values and
concepts were those with which we have grown familiar: a civic and patriot
ideal in which the personality was founded in property, perfected in
citizenship but perpetually threatened by corruption; government figuring
paradoxically as the principal source of corruption and operating through such
means as patronage, faction, standing armies (opposed to the ideal of the
militia), established churches (opposed to the Puritan and deist modes of
American religion) and the promotion of a monied interest — though the
formulation of this last concept was somewhat hindered by the keen desire for
readily available paper credit common in colonies of settlement. A neoclassical
politics provided both the ethos of the elites and the rhetoric of the upwardly
mobile, and accounts for the singular cultural and intellectual homogeneity of
the Founding Fathers and their generation. The commitment of most Americans to
these republican values made the American Revolution inevitable. Britain was
increasingly seen as corrupt and hostile to republicanism, and as a threat to
the established liberties the Americans enjoyed. By abandoning English
constitutionalism and creating a new republic based on the rights of the
individual, the North Americans introduced a new force in the world. Ideas
spread most rapidly when they have found adequate concrete expression. Thus
republicanism entered our Romanic/Germanic world... Up to this point, the
conviction had prevailed in Europe that monarchy best served the interests of
the nation. Now the idea spread that the nation should govern itself. But only
after a state had actually been formed on the basis of the theory of
representation did the full significance of this idea become clear. All later
revolutionary movements have this same goal…. This was the complete reversal
of a principle. Until then, a king who ruled by the grace of God had been the
center around which everything turned. Now the idea emerged that power should
come from below... These two principles are like two opposite poles, and it is
the conflict between them that determines the course of the modern world. In
Europe the conflict between them had not yet taken on concrete form; with the
French Revolution it did. "Républicanisme". Republicanism, especially that of
Rousseau, played a central role in the French Revolution and foreshadowed
modern republicanism. The revolutionaries, after overthrowing the French
monarchy in the 1790s, began by setting up a republic; Napoleon converted it
into an Empire with a new aristocracy. In the 1830s Belgium adopted some of the
innovations of the progressive political philosophers of the Enlightenment.
"Républicanisme" is a French version of modern republicanism. It is a form of
social contract, deduced from Jean-Jacques Rousseau's idea of a general will.
Ideally, each citizen is engaged in a direct relationship with the state,
removing the need for identity politics based on local, religious, or racial
identification. "Républicanisme", in theory, makes anti-discrimination laws
unnecessary, but some critics argue that colour-blind laws serve to perpetuate
discrimination. Modern republicanism. During the Enlightenment, anti-monarchism
extended beyond the civic humanism of the Renaissance. Classical republicanism,
still supported by philosophers such as Rousseau and Montesquieu, was only one
of several theories seeking to limit the power of monarchies rather than
directly opposing them. New forms of anti-monarchism, such as liberalism and
later socialism, quickly overtook classical republicanism as the leading
republican ideologies. Republicanism gained support and monarchies were
challenged throughout Europe. Radicalism. Radicalism arose in European states
in the 19th century. All 19th century "radicals" supported a constitutional
republic and universal suffrage, while European "liberals" were at the time in
favor of constitutional monarchy and census suffrage. Most radical parties
later favored economic liberalism and capitalism. This distinction between
radicalism and liberalism had not totally disappeared in the 20th century,
although many radicals simply joined liberal parties. For example, the Radical
Party of the Left in France or the (originally Italian) Transnational Radical
Party, which exist today, are more focussed on republicanism than on simple
liberalism. Liberalism, was represented in France by the Orleanists who rallied
to the Third Republic only in the late 19th century, after the comte de
Chambord's 1883 death and the 1891 papal encyclical "Rerum Novarum". But the
early Republican, Radical and Radical-Socialist Party in France, and Chartism
in Britain, were closer to republicanism, and the left-wing. Radicalism
remained close to republicanism in the 20th century, at least in France, where
they governed several times with other left-wing parties (participating in both
the Cartel des gauches coalitions as well as the Popular Front). Discredited
after the Second World War, French radicals split into a left-wing party –
the Radical Party of the Left, an associate of the Socialist Party – and the
Radical Party "valoisien", an associate party of the conservative Union for a
Popular Movement (UMP) and its Gaullist predecessors. Italian radicals also
maintained close links with republicanism, as well as with socialism, with the
"Partito radicale" founded in 1955, which became the Transnational Radical
Party in 1989. United States. Republicanism became the dominant political value
of Americans during and after the American Revolution. The "Founding Fathers"
were strong advocates of republican values, especially Samuel Adams, Patrick
Henry, Thomas Paine, Benjamin Franklin, John Adams, Thomas Jefferson, James
Madison and Alexander Hamilton. Since the 20th century, the term republicanism
is more likely to refer to the policies of the Republican Party, the nation's
right-wing political party, than to republican values generally. British Empire
and Commonwealth of Nations. In some countries of the British Empire, later the
Commonwealth of Nations, republicanism taken a variety of forms. In South
Africa, republicanism in the 1960s was identified with the supporters of
apartheid, who resented British interference in their treatment of the
country's black population. In Australia, the debate between republicans and
monarchists is still active and Julia Gillard, the current Australian Prime
Minister, has expressed her wish for Australia to begin the transition phase to
a republic on the death of Elizabeth II. Republican groups are also active in
Great Britain, New Zealand, and Canada. In Jamaica, Prime Minister Portia
Simpson-Miller announced during her inaugural address, that Jamaica would begin
the process of becoming a republic. In Barbados the government gave the promise
of a referendum on becoming a republic in August 2008, but it was postponed due
to the change of government in the 2008 election. Sweden. In Sweden, a major
promoter of republicanism is the Swedish Republican Association, which
advocates the abolition of the Monarchy of Sweden. Spain. There is a renewed
interest in republicanism in Spain after two earlier attempts: the First
Spanish Republic (1873-1874) and the Second Spanish Republic (1931-1939).
Movements such as Ciudadanos Por la República have emerged, and parties like
United Left (Spain) and the Republican Left of Catalonia increasingly refer to
republicanism. In a survey conducted in 2007 reported that 69% of the
population prefer the monarchy to continue, compared with 22% opting for a
Republic. In a 2008 survey, 57.9% of Spanish citizens were indifferent, 16.2%
favored a Republic, 15.7% were monarchists, and 7% claimed to be
"Juancarlistas" (supporters of continued monarchy under King Juan Carlos I,
without a common position for the fate of the monarchy after his death). Neo-
republicanism. Prominent theorists in this movement are Philip Pettit and Cass
Sunstein, who have each written several works defining republicanism and how it
differs from liberalism. Michael Sandel is a late convert to republicanism from
communitarianism. He advocates replacing or supplementing liberalism with
republicanism, as outlined in his "Democracy's Discontent: America in Search of
a Public Philosophy." However, these theorists have had little impact on
government. John W. Maynor, argues that Bill Clinton was interested in these
notions and that he integrated some of them into his 1995 "new social compact"
State of the Union Address. This revival also has its critics. David Wootton,
for instance, argues that throughout history the meanings of the term
"republicanism" have been so diverse, and at times contradictory, that the term
is all but meaningless and any attempt to build a cogent ideology based on it
will fail. Democracy. In the late 20th century there was convergence of
democracy and republicanism. Republicanism is a system that replaces or
accompanies inherited rule. There is an emphasis on liberty, and a rejection of
corruption. It strongly influenced American Revolution and the French
Revolution in the 1770s and 1790s, respectively. Republicans, in these two
examples, tended to reject inherited elites and aristocracies, but two
questions were left open: whether a republic, in order to restrain unchecked
majority rule, should have an unelected upper chamber, with members perhaps
being appointed meritorious experts, and whether it should have a
constitutional monarch. Although conceptually separate from democracy,
republicanism included the key principles of rule by the consent of the
governed and sovereignty of the people. In effect republicanism held that kings
and aristocracies were not the real rulers, but rather the whole people were.
Exactly "how" the people were to rule was an issue of democracy –
republicanism itself did not specify how. In the United States, the solution
was the creation of political parties that reflected the votes of the people,
and which controlled the government (see Republicanism in the United States).
Many exponents of republicanism, such as Benjamin Franklin, Thomas Paine, and
Thomas Jefferson were strong promoters of representative democracy. However,
other supporters of republicanism, such as John Adams and Alexander Hamilton,
were more distrustful of majority rule and sought a government with more power
for elites. There were similar debates in many other democratizing nations.
Democracy and republic. In contemporary usage, the term "democracy" refers to a
government chosen by the people, whether it is direct or representative. Today
the term "republic" usually refers to a representative democracy with an
elected head of state, such as a president, who serves for a limited term; in
contrast to states with a hereditary monarch as a head of state, even if these
states also are representative democracies, with an elected or appointed head
of government such as a prime minister. The Founding Fathers of the United
States rarely praised and often criticized democracy, which in their time
tended to specifically mean direct democracy; James Madison argued, that what
distinguished a "democracy" from a "republic" was that the former became weaker
as it got larger and suffered more violently from the effects of faction,
whereas a republic could get stronger as it got larger and combats faction by
its very structure. What was critical to American values, John Adams insisted,
was that the government should be "bound by fixed laws, which the people have a
voice in making, and a right to defend." Constitutional monarchs and upper
chambers. Some countries (such as the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, Belgium,
Luxembourg, the Scandinavian countries, and Japan) turned powerful monarchs
into constitutional ones with limited, or eventually merely symbolic, powers.
Often the monarchy was abolished along with the aristocratic system, whether or
not they were replaced with democratic institutions (such as in the US, France,
China, Iran, Russia, Germany, Austria, Hungary, Italy, Greece, Turkey and
Egypt). In Australia, New Zealand, Canada, Papua New Guinea, and some other
countries the monarch, or its representative, is given supreme executive power,
but by convention acts only on the advice of his or her ministers. Many nations
had elite upper houses of legislatures, the members of which often had lifetime
tenure, but eventually these houses lost power (as in Britain's House of
Lords), or else became elective and remained powerful (as in the United States
Senate).
