Reserve currency A reserve currency, or anchor currency, is a currency that is
held in significant quantities by many governments and institutions as part of
their foreign exchange reserves. It also tends to be the international pricing
currency for products traded on a global market, and commodities such as oil,
gold, etc. This permits the issuing country to purchase the commodities at a
marginally lower rate than other nations, which must exchange their currencies
with each purchase and pay a transaction cost. For major currencies, this
transaction cost is negligible with respect to the price of the commodity. It
also permits the government issuing the currency to borrow money at a better
rate, as there will always be a larger market for that currency than others.
History. As emphasised by the economist Avinash Persaud, reserve currencies
come and go. "International currencies in the past have included the Chinese
Liang and Greek drachma, coined in the fifth century B.C., the silver punch-
marked coins of fourth century India, the Roman denari, the Byzantine solidus
and Islamic dinar of the middle-ages, the Venetian ducato of the Renaissance,
the seventeenth century Dutch guilder and of course, more recently, sterling
and the dollar.” Before 1944, the world reference currency was the Pound
Sterling. After World War II, the international financial system was governed
by a formal agreement, the Bretton Woods System. Under this system the United
States dollar was placed deliberately as the anchor of the system, with the US
government guaranteeing other central banks that they could sell their US
dollar reserves at a fixed rate for gold. European countries and Japan
deliberately devalued their currencies against the dollar in order to boost
exports and development. In the late 1960s and early 1970s the system suffered
setbacks due to problems pointed out by the Triffin dilemma, a general problem
with any fiat currency under a fixed exchange regime, as the dollar was in the
Bretton Woods system. Global currency reserves. A 2011 study about the current
dominant reserve currency in central banks shows that dollar may not be the
obvious dominant currency, because of the major part of Unallocated Reserves
increasingly reported by central banks since 2001. Theory. Economists debate
whether a single reserve currency will always dominate the global economy. Many
have recently argued that one currency will almost always dominate due to
network externalities, especially in the field of invoicing trade and
denominating foreign debt securities, meaning that there are strong incentives
to conform to the choice that dominates the marketplace. The argument is that,
in the absence of sufficiently large shocks, a currency that dominates the
marketplace will not lose much ground to challengers. However, some economists,
such as Barry Eichengreen argue that this is not as true when it comes to the
denomination of official reserves because the network externalities are not
strong. As long as the currency's market is sufficiently liquid, the benefits
of reserve diversification are strong, as it insures against large capital
losses. The implication is that the world may well soon begin to move away from
a financial system dominated uniquely by the US dollar. In the first half of
the 20th century multiple currencies did share the status as primary reserve
currencies. Although the British Sterling was the largest currency, both the
French franc and the German mark shared large portions of the market until the
First World War, after which the mark was replaced by the dollar. Since the
Second World War, the dollar has dominated official reserves, but this is
likely a reflection of the unusual domination of the American economy during
this period, as well as official discouragement of reserve status from the
potential rivals, Germany and Japan. The top reserve currency is generally
selected by the banking community for the strength and stability of the economy
in which it is used. Thus, as a currency becomes less stable, or its economy
becomes less dominant, bankers may over time abandon it for a currency issued
by a larger or more stable economy. This can take a relatively long time, as
recognition is important in determining a reserve currency. For example, it
took many years after the United States overtook the United Kingdom as the
world's largest economy before the dollar overtook Sterling as the dominant
global reserve currency. Schenk has shown in her 2009 study that in 1944
(Bretton Woods) the US dollar was chosen as the world reference currency
whereas it was only the second currency in global reserves. The G8 also
frequently issues public statements as to exchange rates. In the past due to
the Plaza Accord, its predecessor bodies could directly manipulate rates to
reverse large trade deficits. Major reserve currencies. United States dollar.
The United States dollar is the most widely held currency in the Allocated
Reserves today. Throughout the last decade, an average of two thirds of the
total Allocated foreign exchange reserves of countries have been in US dollars.
For this reason, the US dollar is said to have "reserve-currency status",
making it somewhat easier for the United States to run higher trade deficits
with greatly postponed economic impact or even postponing a currency crisis.
Central bank reserves held in dollar-denominated debt, however, are small
compared to private holdings of such debt. In the event that non-United States
holders of dollar-denominated assets decided to shift holdings to assets
denominated in other currencies, there could be serious consequences for the US
economy. Changes of this kind are rare, and typically change takes place
gradually over time; the markets involved adjust accordingly. However, the
dollar remains until recently the favorite reserve currency because it has
stability along with assets such as United States Treasury security that have
both scale and liquidity. US dollar dominant position in global reserves is
very much challenged currently, because of the growing share of Unallocated
Reserves, and because of the doubt regarding dollar stability in the long term.
Euro. The euro is currently the second most commonly held reserve currency,
comprising approximately a quarter of allocated holdings. After World War II
and the rebuilding of the German economy, the German Deutsche Mark gained the
status of the second most important reserve currency after the US dollar. When
the euro was launched on 1 January 1999, replacing the Mark, French Franc and
ten other European currencies, it inherited the status of a major reserve
currency from the Mark. Since then, its contribution to official reserves has
risen continually as banks seek to diversify their reserves and trade in the
eurozone continues to expand. Former U.S. Federal Reserve Chairman Alan
Greenspan said in September 2007 that the euro could replace the U.S. dollar as
the world's primary reserve currency. It is "absolutely conceivable that the
euro will replace the US dollar as reserve currency, or will be traded as an
equally important reserve currency." Econometric analysis by Jeffery Frankel
and Menzie Chinn in 2006 suggests the euro may replace the U.S. dollar as the
major reserve currency by 2020 if (1) the remaining EU members, including the
UK and Denmark, adopt the euro by 2020 "or" (2) the recent depreciation trend
of the dollar persists into the future. In recent years, the euro's increase in
the share of the worldwide currency reserve basket has continued to
increase—albeit at a slower rate than prior to the beginning of the worldwide
credit crunch related recession and sovereign debt crisis, which adversely
impacted the Euro and slowed its adoption As of 2012, as the European sovereign
debt crisis intensifies, there is growing uncertainty about the future of the
Euro, some analysts are even predicting it's collapse in the next few years.
Other reserve currencies. Pound sterling. The United Kingdom's pound sterling
was the primary reserve currency of much of the world in the 19th century. The
emergence of the USA as an economic superpower (and, importantly, the
establishment of the U.S. Federal Reserve System in 1913), U.S. economic
dominance from the second half of the 20th century onward, as well as economic
weakness in the UK at various intervals during the second half of the 20th
century resulted in Sterling losing its status as the world's most reserved
currency. Since mid-2006 it is the third most widely held reserve currency,
having seen a resurgence in popularity in recent years, growing from about 2.5%
to around 4% of all currency reserves. Analysts say this resurgence is caused
by carry-trade investors considering the pound as a stable high-yield proxy to
the euro, as well as the position of London in world financial affairs.
Japanese yen. Japan's yen is part of the International Monetary Fund's (IMF)
special drawing rights (SDR) valuation. The SDR currency value is determined
daily by the IMF, based on the exchange rates of the currencies making up the
basket, as quoted at noon at the London market. The valuation basket is
reviewed and adjusted every five years. The SDR Values and yen conversion for
government procurement are used by the Japan External Trade Organization for
Japan's official procurement in international trade. Swiss franc. The Swiss
franc is often considered a reserve currency, because of the perceived
stability of the currency and the Swiss banking system. However, the share of
all foreign exchange reserves held in Swiss francs has historically been well
below 0.5%. The daily trading market turnover of the franc however, ranked
fifth, or about 3.4%, among all currencies in a 2007 survey by the Bank for
International Settlements. Canadian dollar. A number of central banks (and
commercial banks) keep Canadian dollars as a reserve currency. In the economy
of the Americas, the Canadian dollar plays a similar role to that played by the
Australian dollar (AUD) in the Asia-Pacific region. The Canadian dollar (as a
regional reserve currency for banking) has been an important part of the
British, French and Dutch Caribbean states' economies and finance systems since
the 1950s. The Canadian dollar is also held by many central banks in Central
America and South America. The Canadian dollar is held in Latin America because
of remittances and international trade in each nation. Canadian economists
primarily define and value the Canadian dollar in terms of the United States
dollar, and thus by observing how the Canadian dollar floats in terms of the US
dollar, foreign-exchange economists can indirectly observe internal behaviours
and patterns in the US economy that could not be seen by direct observation
(Canada’s primary foreign-trade relationship is with the United States).
Also, considered a petrodollar, the Canadian dollar has only fully evolved into
a global reserve currency since the 1970s when it was floated against all other
world currencies. Some economists have attributed the rise of importance of the
Canadian dollar to the long term effects of the Nixon Shock that effectively
ended the Bretton Woods system of global finance. The Canadian dollar is used
as a reserve currency around the world and in 2007 it was ranked 6th in value
held as reserves. Call for new major reserve currency. A report released by the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development in 2010, called for
abandoning the U.S. dollar as the single major reserve currency. The report
states that the new reserve system should not be based on a single currency or
even multiple national currencies but instead permit the emission of
international liquidity to create a more stable global financial system.
Countries such as Russia and the People's Republic of China, central banks, and
economic analysts and groups, such as the Gulf Cooperation Council, have
expressed a desire to see an independent new currency replace the dollar as the
reserve currency. On 10 July 2009, Russian President Medvedev proposed a new
'world currency' at the G8 meeting in London as an alternative reserve currency
to replace the dollar. According to economist Michael Hudson, China has said,
"we don't want to make any more foreign exchange reserve of any paper currency,
because all the paper currencies are government debt currencies." China,
Russia, India, Turkey, Brazil, Venezuela and oil-producing countries have
recently agreed "to transact all of their mutual trade and investment in their
own currencies" effectively minimizing the need, at least in the short term,
for a global reserve currency. And yet oil is still priced in dollars, which
has brought complaints about OPEC's policies of managing oil quotas to maintain
dollar price stability. Special drawing rights. Some have proposed the use of
the International Monetary Fund's (IMF) special drawing rights (SDRs) as a
reserve. China has proposed using SDRs, calculated daily from a basket of U.S.
dollar, euro, Japanese yen and British pound, for international payments. On 3
September 2009, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD)
issued a report calling for a new reserve currency based on the SDR, managed by
a new global reserve bank. The IMF released a report in February 2011, stating
that using SDRs could help stabilize the world economy. Chinese yuan. The
Chinese yuan or renminbi (RMB) cannot be used as a reserve currency as long as
the Chinese government maintains capital controls on the conversion of its
currency. The currency would not be attractive to central banks for holding
unless China develop a strong open bond market. The Bank for International
Settlements estimates that in 2010 around 0.9% of all currency market
transactions were carried out in renminbi. Chinese President Hu Jintao has said
that it would be a long process before the yuan will be accepted as a global
currency. However China has taken modest steps in this direction with currency-
swap agreements with a few western Pacific nations.
