Returning officer In various parliamentary systems, a returning officer is
responsible for overseeing elections in one or more constituencies. Australia.
In Australia a returning officer is an employee of the Australian Electoral
Commission or a State Electoral Commission who heads the local divisional
office full-time, and oversees elections in their division, or an employee of a
private firm which carries out elections and/or ballots in the private and/or
public sectors, or anyone who carries out any election and/or ballot for any
group or groups. Canada. In Canada, the returning officer of an electoral
district is appointed for a ten year term by the Chief Electoral Officer. The
returning officer is responsible for handling the electoral process in the
riding, and updating the National Register of Electors with current information
about voters in the electoral district to which they are appointed. Before
enactment of the Canada Elections Act in 2000, in the case of a tie between the
two leading candidates in an election, the returning officer would cast the
deciding vote. Since 2000, a tie between two leading candidates automatically
results in a by-election. The provinces and territories of Canada each have
their own returning officers. Germany. Germany has a Federal Returning Officer
and a returning officer in each State. Hong Kong. In Hong Kong, the returning
officer is usually an administrative officer of the government. Ireland. In the
Republic of Ireland, the post of Returning Officer in Dublin and Cork is held
by the City Sheriff, and in the other areas by the County Registrar of the area
(a senior court official). For local elections the position is held by the
administrative head of the local council. The returning officer for
presidential elections and referendums is a senior official in the franchise
section of the Department of the Environment. United Kingdom. General
elections. In England and Wales the post of returning officer for general
elections is an honorary one, held by the high sheriff of the county for a
county constituency or the mayor or chairman of the local council for a borough
constituency. If a constituency overlaps district and county borders, the
returning officer is designated by the Secretary of State for Justice. In
practice, the task of conducting the election is delegated to an acting
returning officer, who is usually a senior officer in the local authority (the
only duties which can be reserved and undertaken by the returning officer are
related to the receipt of the writ and the declaration of the result, and only
if written notice is given by the returning officer to the acting returning
officer). In an English or Welsh constituency where the returning officer is
the chairman of the local council or borough council respectively, the
Electoral Registration Officer is automatically the acting returning officer.
In an English or Welsh constituency where the high sheriff or mayor is
returning officer, the acting returning officer is designated by the Secretary
of State for Justice. In Scotland, there is no office of acting returning
officer and the position of returning officer is not an honorary one. The
returning officer for general elections is the same person who has been
appointed returning officer for the election of councillors in the local
authority in which the constituency is situated. If a constituency covers more
than one local authority area, the Secretary of State for Justice designates
which local authority returning officer will discharge the function. In
Northern Ireland, the Chief Electoral Officer acts as the returning officer.
Local elections. In England, every district council and unitary authority is
required to appoint an officer of the council to be the Returning Officer for
the election of councillors to their local authority. County councils must also
appoint a Returning Officer for the election of councillors within the county.
In Wales, every county borough council is required to appoint an officer of the
council to be the Returning Officer for the election of councillors to the
local authority and for the election of councillors for any communities within
the principal area. Singapore. Section 49, Subsection 7E, Paragraph A of the
Parliamentary Elections Act Section 32, Subsection 8D, Paragraph A of the
Presidential Elections Act, are stated, only if the total number of overseas
electors lawfully entitled to vote at the election in that electoral division
is less than the difference between the number of votes given to the two best-
performing candidates or group of candidates. The RO's duties also encompasses
announcing the best-performing losing candidates as NCMP post-elections in the
government gazette.
