Reverse discrimination Reverse discrimination is a term referring to
discrimination against members of a dominant or majority group or in favor of
members of a minority or historically disadvantaged group. Groups may be
defined in terms of race, gender, ethnicity, or other factors. This
discrimination may seek to redress social inequalities where minority groups
have been denied access to the same privileges of the majority group. In such
cases it is intended to remove discrimination that minority groups may already
face. Reverse discrimination may also be used to highlight the discrimination
inherent in affirmative action programs. Reverse Discrimination can be defined
as the unfair treatment of members of the majority groups resulting from
preferential policies, as in college admissions or employment, intended to
remedy earlier discrimination against minorities. Conceptualizing efforts as
reverse discrimination began to become popular in the early-mid 1970s, the time
period that focused on underrepresentation and affirmative action as a good
faith effort or due diligence to remedy the effects of past discrimination.
However, the concept of reverse discrimination has two different views: a broad
sense and a narrow sense. In a broad sense, it refers to discrimination against
Whites or males in employment, education, and any other areas of life. In a
narrow sense, reverse discrimination refers to the negative impact Whites or
males may experience because of affirmative action policies. The two views are
often conflated, which leads to confusion and misinformation. The law in some
countries, such as the UK, draws a distinction between “equality of
provision” and “equality of outcome”, recognising that identical
treatment may sometimes act to preserve inequality rather than eliminate it.
Opponents of this distinction may label it as an example of positive
discrimination. Different Perspectives. Compensation. When reverse
discrimination is viewed as compensation for groups who lost ability to compete
on equal term. This group will benefit more because they are restrained. They
will use this competitive edge to claim jobs, which the non-ability loss groups
would have otherwise gotten. Thus, this group only stands to gain from the
relevant effects of the original discrimination and that bypassed individuals
stand to lose the most from reverse discrimination. Neutralizing Competition.
Reverse discrimination is justified insofar as it neutralizes competitive
disadvantages caused by past discrimination. This may be correct, but it is
also oversimplified. In actuality, there are many ways in which a person's
environment may affect his ability to compete and there is logical differences
among these ways which affect the degree to which reverse discrimination is
called for and thus a way of restoring equal access to those goods which
society distributes. competitively. Social Change. The aim of reverse
discrimination is not to compensate anyone for any harm caused by past
wrongdoing, but rather simply to promote certain highly desirable forms of
social change. Although the details of this account have tended to vary, its
fundamental thrust is that reverse discrimination is a necessary tool for
improving the socioeconomic position of minorities and for providing role-
models for both members of minority groups and women, and that these results
are in turn essential steps toward bringing the present and future members of
these groups into society's mainstream. Reverse discrimination should not bee
seen primarily as compensating past wrongs, but rather as breaking a endlessly
continuing cycle of poverty and subservience for some groups. Reverse
Discrimination has an important role to play not just in ameliorating the
effects of disadvantage but also in removing its causes. Reverse Discrimination
in the Workplace. Reverse discrimination is ethically challenging and has many
different viewpoints. For example, it is important to consider reverse
discrimination in the work place. When members of a particular group have been
barred from a particular employment, it is said that this group has received
less than its fair share of employment in question and deserves to receive more
by way of compensation. Thus, this group is being compensated for past lack of
employment. Therefore, a group already existing in the workplace will be
discriminated against, even if they’ve never been denied employment
previously. If the point of reverse discrimination is to compensate a wronged
group, it will hardly matter if those who are preferentially hired were not
among the original victims of discrimination. Moreover, the current
beneficiaries of reverse discrimination are not often the same persons as those
who were harmed by the original discrimination, and those who now bear the
burden of reverse discrimination are seldom the same persons as those who
practiced the original discrimination. Because of this, reverse discrimination
is said to be both irrelevant to the aim of compensating for past injustices
and unfair to those whose superior qualifications are bypassed It is often
argued, by majority groups that they are being discriminated for hiring and
advancement because of affirmative action policies. However, critics of this
argument often cite the symbolic significance of a job has to be taken into
consideration as well as qualifications. Countries. Australia. Qantas Airways's
board policy of not allowing male passengers sitting next to children
travelling alone for fear of child molestation has been criticized by persons
concerned as act of reverse discrimination against men. According to Qantas,
this policy has been shared by other airlines in Australia and around the
globe. However, following a public outcry, Virgin Australia has announced that
it will review its policy. European Union. In European Union law, reverse
discrimination occurs where the a Member State’s national law provides for
worse treatment of its own citizens or domestic products than other EU
citizens/goods under EU law. This can happen because of the legal principle of
subsidiarity that EU law is not applicable in situations purely internal to one
Member State. For example, the situation regarding tuition fees in the United
Kingdom is one of reverse discrimination: English, Welsh and Northern Irish
students studying in Scotland would be liable to pay tuition fee. Students from
outside the UK but from within the EU would not be required to pay tuition fees
if studying in Scotland. Korea. There was a controversy over reverse
discrimination in Korea. After the current President took office in February
2003, there arose claims that natives of the Southwest region were
systematically excluded from top posts in the prosecutors office, the police,
and the Ministry of Home Affairs and Government Administration. For example, as
a result of the recent personnel change, only 1 out of the 20 top officials at
the Home Affairs Ministry is from the Southwest. There are also claims that
regional projects have been removed from the new government's priority agenda.
Ironically, the Southwest region has been a core support of the incumbent party
for decades and the current President was supported by more than 90% of the
electorates in the Southwest region in the presidential election in December
2002. India. In India, among the limited positions for higher education, 50
percent are reserved. Reserved category candidates can select a position from
the Open 50 percent if he or she has good merit. This results in further
reverse discrimination of Open/General/Non Reserved candidates. Further, since
there are no economic criteria in classifying Reservation, poorer sections of
reserved class often remain poor whereas the affluent section reap benefits for
successive generations. Also, the poorer sections of Open/General Category
become devoid of access to higher education for even slightly low merit on
competitive exams. The difference in merit on entrance exams is often very wide
between the reserved and unreserved classes. In India, the term is often used
by citizens protesting against reservation and quotas. United Kingdom. UK law
draws a distinction between Equality of Provision and Equality of Outcome,
particularly in respect to disability rights. The Disability Discrimination Act
1995 and the Equality Act 2010 make it clear that treating two people
identically may not be sufficient to guarantee that they have been treated
equally in law if the task, physical environment or service does not offer them
equality of outcome. The law provides for disabled people to request the
provision of 'reasonable adjustments' to ensure that they are able to access
employment, services and the built environment with the same potential as non-
disabled people. In November 2007, David Rosin, a former vice-president of the
Royal College of Surgeons wrote in the magazine "Hospital Doctor": “It is
time that someone spoke up concerning the reverse discrimination with respect
to merit awards” and saying that "female and ethnic minority consultants are
being given preferential treatment to meet artificial quotas". United States.
The number of reverse discrimination cases filed with the Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission doubled in the 1990s and continue to reflect a growing
percentage of all discrimination cases everal high-profile court cases have
continued to shape legal precedence. In fact, reverse discrimination cases in
various employment sectors (government, public service, higher education) have
resulted in multi-million dollar settlements. These settlements send a clear
message to affirmative action proponents. In a study conducted by S. K. Camara
& M. P. Orbe, they collected narratives of individuals describing situations
where they were discriminated against based on their majority-group status
(cases of reverse discrimination). The population sample consisted of the
respondents being 30% female and 70% male. Birth era of respondents were 3% in
the pre civil rights era between 1900-1935, and 53% during civil rights era
1938-1969, and 44% in the post civil rights era between 1970 and 1985.
Approximately 9% of the respondents were Hispanic, 3% African American, 77%
Caucasian 1% Asian, 1% Native American, and 9% identified themselves as other.
) Vast majority of these stories involved Whites describing discrimination
based on their race = a value of 70. Men who were discriminated against based
on their sex = a value of 19. Young people experience age-based discrimination
= a value of 12., and heterosexuals experiencing discrimination based on their
sexual orientation = a value of 4. Colleges. University of Texas had to defer
the use of racial preferences in their college admissions after the US Court of
Appeals for the Fifth Circuit barred the school from considering race in
admitting students. The ruling came in a lawsuit brought by four white
applications to the Texas Law School. They were denied admission even though
their grade point averages were greater than minority applications that were
accepted. The four white students also had a greater Law School Admission Test
scores Opponents. Opponents of Reverse Discrimination sometimes object that it
cannot achieve its objectives because it inevitably creates two classes; those
who gain their job or university place (or whatever) purely on merit and those
who succeed only because of the existence of the programme. So when women or
ethnic minorities succeed on merit alone this is not recognized and their
success is attributed to Reverse Discrimination. Statistics on the numbers and
outcomes of complaints of employment discrimination suggest that reverse
discrimination is rare. Most complaints are not claims against affirmative
action polices. According to a report prepared for the labour department in the
United States by Alfred W. Blumrosen, affirmative action polices have caused
few claims of reverse discrimination by white people. The report found less
than 100 reverse-discrimination cases among more than 3,000 discrimination
opinions by Federal district and appears could from 1990-1994. The report
indicated that a high proportion of the claims lacked merit. In Blumrosens
report, national surveys revealed only a few whites had experienced reverse
discrimination, only 5 to 12 percent of whites believe that their race has cost
them a job or promotion. In addition, Blumrosens report indicated the reports
filed with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission offers additional
evidence that reverse discrimination is rare: 2% of cases were by white men
were charging, sex, race or national origin discrimination and 1.8% were by
white women charging race discrimination. Furthermore, newer reports by the
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission have found that less than 10% of race
related complaints were filed by whites, only 18% of gender related complaints
and 4% of the court cases were filed by men also. Other evidence suggests that
when national samples of Whites are analyzed when they have been asked if they
personally have experienced the loss of job, promotion, or college admission
because of their race, only 2%-13% say yes. See also. General Race Gender Other
