Revisionist Zionism Revisionist Zionism is a nationalist faction within the
Zionist movement. It is the founding ideology of the non-religious right in
Israel, and was the chief ideological competitor to the dominant socialist
Labor Zionism. Revisionism is the precursor of the Likud Party. The ideology
was developed originally by Ze'ev Jabotinsky who advocated a "revision" of the
"practical Zionism" of David Ben-Gurion and Chaim Weizmann, which was focused
on independent settlement of "Eretz Yisrael". In 1935, after the Zionist
Executive rejected his political program and refused to state that "the aim of
Zionism was the establishment of a Jewish state," Jabotinsky resigned from the
Zionist Organization. He founded the New Zionist Organization (NZO) to conduct
independent political activity for free immigration and the establishment of a
Jewish State. Revisionist Zionism was instead centered on a vision of
"political Zionism", which Jabotinsky regarded as following the legacy of
Theodor Herzl, the founder of modern political Zionism. In its early years, and
under Jabotinsky's leadership, Revisionist Zionism was focused on gaining
British aid for settlement. Later, Revisionist groups independent of
Jabotinsky's leadership conducted campaigns of violence against the British
authorities in Palestine to drive them out and establish a Jewish state.
Ideology. Revisionism was distinguished primarily from other ideologies within
Zionism by its territorial maximalism. While not the only group to do so, they
insisted upon the Jewish right to sovereignty over the whole territory of Eretz
Yisrael (originally encompassing all of Mandatory Palestine). The British
establishment of Transjordan (modern day state of Jordan) adversely affected
this goal and was a great set-back for the movement. After this and until
statehood, Revisionist Zionism became known more for its advocacy of more
belligerent, assertive posture and actions against both British and Arab
control of the region. Revisionism's foremost political objective was to
maintain the territorial integrity of the historical land of Israel and
establish a Jewish state with a Jewish majority on both sides of the River
Jordan. Jewish statehood was always a major ideological goal for Revisionism,
but it was not to be gained at the price of partitioning Eretz Yisrael.
Jabotinsky and his followers, therefore, consistently rejected proposals to
partition Palestine into an Arab state and a Jewish state. Menachem Begin,
Jabotinsky's successor, therefore opposed the 1947 United Nations partition
plan. Revisionists considered the subsequent partition of Palestine following
the 1949 Armistice Agreements to have no legitimacy. During the first two
decades after independence, the Revisionist Party, Herut, remained in
opposition. The party slowly began to revise its ideology in an effort to
change this situation and gain political power. While Begin maintained the
Revisionist claim to Jewish sovereignty over all of Eretz Israel; by the late
1950s, control over the East Bank of the Jordan ceased to be an operative
element within Revisionist ideology. Following Herut's merger with the Liberal
Party in 1965, references to the ideal of Jewish sovereignty over "both banks
of the Jordan" appeared less and less frequently. By the 1970s, the legitimacy
of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan was no longer questioned. In 1994, the
complete practical abandonment of the "both banks" principle was apparent when
an overwhelming majority of Likud Knesset Members (MKs) voted in favor of the
peace treaty with Jordan. On the day the Six-Day War started in June 1967, the
Revisionists, as part of the Gahal faction, joined the national unity
government under Prime Minister Levi Eshkol; this resulted in Begin serving in
the cabinet for the first time. Ben-Gurion's Rafi party also joined. The war
also brought to an end Labor's previous efforts to delegitimize Revisionism,
because on the eve of the war, the dominant party felt it had to include the
Revisionist opposition in an emergency national unity government. This step not
only made the opposition views acceptable in the eyes of the public. It also
showed that the dominant party no longer felt that it could monopolize power.
This unity arrangement lasted until August 1970, when Begin and Gahal left the
government. Some sources indicate the resignation was due to disagreements over
the Rogers Plan and its "in place" cease-fire with Egypt along the Suez Canal,;
other sources, including William B. Quandt, note that Begin left the unity
government because the Labor party, by formally accepting UN 242 in mid-1970,
had accepted "peace for withdrawal" on all fronts. On August 5, 1970, Begin
himself explained before the Knesset why he was resigning. He said, "As far as
we are concerned, what do the words 'withdrawal from territories administered
since 1967 by Israel' mean other than Judea and Samaria. Not all the
territories; but by all opinion, most of them." Following Israel's capture of
the West Bank and Gaza in the 1967 war, Revisionism's territorial aspirations
concentrated on these territories. These areas were far more central to ancient
Jewish history than the East Bank of the Jordan and most of the areas within
Israel's post-1949 borders. In 1968, Begin defined the "eternal patrimony of
our ancestors" as "Jerusalem, Hebron, Bethlehem, Judea, Shechem [Nablus" in the
West Bank. In 1973, Herut's election platform called for the annexation of the
West Bank and Gaza. When Menachem Begin became leader of the broad Likud
coalition and, soon Prime Minister, he considerably modified Herut's expansive
territorial aims. The party's aspiration to unite all of mandatory Palestine
under Jewish rule was scaled down. Instead, Begin spoke of the historic unity
of Israel in the West Bank, even hinting that he would make territorial
concessions in the Sinai as part of a complete peace settlement. When Begin
finally came to power in the 1977 election, his overriding concern as Prime
Minister (1977‚Äì1983) was to maintain Israeli control over the West Bank and
Gaza. In 1981 he declared to a group of Jewish settlers: "I, Menachem, the son
of Ze'ev and Hasia Begin, do solemnly swear that as long as I serve the nation
as Prime Minister we will not leave any part of Judea, Samaria, the Gaza
Strip." One of the main mechanisms for accomplishing this objective was the
establishment of Jewish settlements. Under Labor governments, between 1967 and
1977, the Jewish population of the territories reached 3,200; Labor's limited
settlement activity was predicated upon making a future territorial compromise
when the majority of the territory would be returned to Arab control. By
contrast, the Likud's settlement plan aimed to settle 750,000 Jews all over the
territories in order to prevent a territorial compromise. As a result, by 1984,
there were about 44,000 settlers outside East Jerusalem. In the diplomatic
arena, Begin pursued his core ideological objective in a relatively pragmatic
manner. He held back from annexing the West Bank and Gaza, recognizing that
this was not feasible in the short term, due to international opposition. He
signed the Camp David Accords (1978) with Egypt that referred to the
"legitimate rights of the Palestinians" (although Begin insisted that the
Hebrew version referred only to "the Arabs of Eretz Yisrael" and not to
"Palestinians"). Begin also promoted the idea of autonomy for the Palestinians,
albeit only a "personal" autonomy that would not give them control over any
territory. But his uncompromising stance in the negotiations over Palestinian
autonomy from 1979 to 1981 led to the resignations of the more moderate Moshe
Dayan and Ezer Weizman, Foreign and Defense Ministers, respectively, both of
whom left the Likud government. According to Weizman, the significant
concessions Begin made to the Egyptians in the Camp David Accords and the
Egyptian‚ÄîIsraeli peace treaty of the following year were motivated, in part,
by his ideological commitment to the eventual annexation of the territories. By
removing the most powerful Arab state from the conflict, reducing international
(mainly American) pressure for Israeli concessions on the issue of the
territories, and prolonging inconclusive talks on Palestinian autonomy, Begin
was buying time for his government's settlement activities in the territories.
Begin continued to vow that territory, which was part of historic Eretz Israel
in the West Bank and Gaza, would never be returned. His adamant stand on the
territory became an obstacle to extending the 1979 peace treaty. The
Revisionist ideological stand concerning the territories has continued,
although it has moderated somewhat and become more 'pragmatic' in the years
since, as discussed below. Jabotinsky and Revisionist Zionism. After World War
I, Jabotinsky was elected to the first legislative assembly in the Yishuv, and
in 1921 he was elected to the Executive Council of the Zionist Organization
(known as the World Zionist Organization after 1960). He quit the latter group
in 1923, however, due to differences of opinion with its chairman, Chaim
Weizmann. In 1925, Jabotinsky formed the Revisionist Zionist Alliance, in the
World Zionist Congress to advocate his views, which included increased
cooperation with Britain on transforming the entire Mandate for Palestine on
both sides of the Jordan River into a sovereign Jewish state, loyal to the
British Empire. To this end, Jabotinsky advocated for mass Jewish immigration
from Europe and the creation of a second Jewish Legion to guard a nascent
Jewish state at inception. A staunch anglophile, Jabotinsky wished to convince
Britain that a Jewish state would be in the best interest of the British
Empire, perhaps even an autonomous extension of it in the Middle East. When, in
1935, the Zionist Organization failed to accept Jabotinsky's program, he and
his followers seceded to form the "New Zionist Organization". The NZO rejoined
the ZO in 1946. The Zionist Organization was roughly composed of General
Zionists, who were in the majority, followers of Jabotinsky, who came in a
close second, and Labour Zionists, led by David Ben-Gurion, who comprised a
minority yet had much influence where it mattered, in the Yishuv. Despite its
strong representation in the Zionist Organization, Revisionist Zionism had a
small presence in the Yishuv, in contrast to Labour Zionism, which was dominant
among kibbutzim and workers, and hence the settlement enterprise. General
Zionism was dominant among the middle class, which later aligned itself with
the Revisionists. In the Jewish Diaspora, Revisionism was most established in
Poland, where its base of operations was organized in various political parties
and Zionist Youth groups, such as Betar. By the late 1930s, Revisionist Zionism
was divided into three distinct ideological streams: the "Centrists", the
Irgun, and the "Messianists". Jabotinsky later argued for a need to establish a
base in the Yishuv, and developed a vision to guide the Revisionist movement
and the new Jewish society on the economic and social policy centered around
the ideal of the Jewish middle class in Europe. Jabotinsky believed that basing
the movement on a philosophy contrasting with the socialist oriented Labour
Zionists would attract the support of the General Zionists. In line with this
thinking, the Revisionists transplanted into the Yishuv their own youth
movement, Betar. They also set up a paramilitary group, Irgun, a labour union,
the National Labour Federation, and their own health services. The latter were
intended to counteract the increasing hegemony of Labour Zionism over community
services via the Histadrut and address the refusal of the Histadrut to make its
services available to Revisionist Party members. Irgun: Origin and activities.
The Irgun (shorthand for "Irgun Tsvai Leumi", Hebrew for "National Military
Organization" ◊ê◊®◊í◊ï◊ü ◊¶◊ë◊ê◊ô ◊ú◊ê◊ï◊û◊ô) had its roots initially in the
Betar youth movement in Poland, which Jabotinsky founded. By the 1940s, they
had transplanted many of its members from Europe and the United States to
Palestine. The movement, now acting autonomously from the Hatzohar leadership
in Poland, decided to organize locally, as its small membership was
increasingly overshadowed by Labour Zionists, who were predominantly focused on
settling the land. While Jabotinsky continued to lobby the British Empire, the
Irgun, under the leadership of people such as David Raziel and later Menachem
Begin, fought politically against the Labour Zionists and militarily against
the British for the establishment of a Jewish state, independent of any orders
from Jabotinsky. Acting often in conflict (but at times, also in coordination)
with rival clandestine militias such as the "Haganah" and the "Lehi" (or Stern
Group), the Irgun 's efforts would feature prominently in the armed struggles
against British and Arab forces alike in the 1930s and 1940s, and ultimately
become decisive in the closing events of the 1948 Arab-Israeli War. After 1948,
members of the Irgun were variously demobilised, or incorporated directly into
the nascent Israeli Defense Forces; and on the political front, Irgunist
ideology found a new vehicle of expression in the "Herut" (or "Freedom") Party.
Lehi: Origin and activities. The movement called "Lehi" and nicknamed the
"Stern Gang" by the British, was led by Avraham "Yair" Stern, until his death.
Stern did not join the Revisionist Zionist party in university but instead
joined another group called "Hulda". He formed Lehi in 1940 as an offshoot from
Irgun, which was initially named "Irgun Zvai Leumi be-Yisrael" (National
Military Organization in Israel or NMO). Following Stern's death in
1942‚Äîkilled while already in custody by British police‚Äîand the arrest of
many of its members, the group went into eclipse until it was reformed as
"Lehi" under a triumvirate of Israel Eldad, Natan Yellin-Mor, and Yitzhak
Shamir. Lehi was guided also by spiritual leader Uri Zvi Greenberg. The Lehi,
in particular their members in prison, were encouraged in their struggle by
Rabbi Aryeh Levin a greatly respected Jewish sage of the time. Shamir became
the Prime Minister of Israel forty years later. Irgun‚Äîand, to a lesser
extent, Lehi‚Äîwere influenced by the romantic nationalism of Italian
nationalist Giuseppe Garibaldi. The movement's activities were independent of
any diaspora leadership, but were backed by several figures in the diaspora.
While the Irgun stopped its activities against the British during World War II,
at least until 1944, Lehi continued guerrilla warfare against the British
authorities. It considered the British rule of Mandatory Palestine to be an
illegal occupation, and concentrated its attacks mainly against British targets
(unlike the other underground movements, which were also involved in fighting
against Arab paramilitary groups). In 1940, Lehi proposed intervening in the
Second World War on the side of Nazi Germany to attain their help in expelling
Britain from Mandate Palestine and to offer their assistance in "evacuating"
the Jews of Europe. Late in 1940, Lehi representative Naftali Lubenchik was
sent to Beirut where he met the German official Werner Otto von Hentig. "See
Lehi (group)#Contact with Nazi Germany" Lehi prisoners captured by the British
generally refused to present a defence when brought to trial in British courts.
They would only read out statements in which they declared that the court,
representing an occupying force, had no jurisdiction over them. For the same
reason, Lehi prisoners refused to plead for amnesty, even when it was clear
that this would have spared them from the death penalty. In two cases, Lehi men
killed themselves in prison to deprive the British of the ability to hang them.
Tensions between the Irgun and Lehi simmered until the two groups forged an
alliance during the Israeli War of Independence. Revisionist Zionism: Ideology.
Ideologically, Revisionism advocated the creation of a Jewish state on both
sides of the Jordan River, that is, a state which would include the present-day
Israel, as well as West Bank, Gaza and all or part of the modern state of
Jordan. Jordan was separated from Mandatory Palestine in 1922 in response to
Arab resentment of the Balfour Declaration. All three Revisionist streams,
including Centrists who advocated a British-style liberal democracy, and the
two more militant streams, which would become Irgun and Lehi, supported Jewish
settlement on both sides of the Jordan River; in most cases, they differed only
on how this should be achieved. (Some supporters within Labor Zionism, such as
Mapai's Ben-Gurion also accepted this interpretation for the Jewish homeland.)
Jabotinsky wanted to gain the help of Britain in this endeavor, while Lehi and
the Irgun, following Jabotinsky's death, wanted to conquer both sides of the
river independently of the British. The Irgun stream of Revisionism opposed
power-sharing with Arabs. On the topic of "transfer" (expulsion of the Arabs),
Jabotinsky's statements were ambiguous. In some writings he supported the
notion, but only as an act of self-defense, in others he argued that Arabs
should be included in the liberal democratic society that he was advocating,
and in others still, he completely disregarded the potency of Arab resistance
to Jewish settlement, and stated that settlement should continue, and the Arabs
be ignored. National-messianism vs. Jewish nationalism. Up to 1933, a number of
members from the national-messianist wing of Revisionism were inspired by the
fascist movement of Benito Mussolini. Abba Ahimeir was attracted to fascism for
its staunch anti-communism and its focus on rebuilding the glory of the past,
which national-messianists such as Uri Zvi Greenberg felt had much connection
to their view of what the Revisionist movement should be. Abba Ahimeir's
ideology was based in Oswald Spengler's monumental study on the decline of the
West, but his Zionist orientation caused him to adapt its ultimate conclusions.
Achimeir's basic assumption was that liberal bourgeois European culture was
degenerate, and deeply eroded from within by an excess of liberalism and
individualism. Socialism and communism were portrayed as "overcivilized"
ideologies. Fascism on the other hand, like Zionism, was a return to the roots
of the national culture and the historical past. According to Achimeir, Italian
Fascism was not anti-Semitic or anti-Zionist, whereas communist ideology and
praxis were intrinsically so. He also developed a favorable attitude toward
fascist praxis and its psycho-politics, such as the principle of the all-
powerful leader, the use of propaganda to generate a spirit of heroism and duty
to the homeland, and the cultivation of youthful vitality (as manifested in the
fascist youth movements). Ahimeir joined the Revisionist movement in 1930, but
before joining he wrote a regular column entitled "From the Notebook of a
Fascist" in the unaffiliated but pro-Revisionist magazine "Doar Hayom". He
crafted his pro-fascistic views in these columns, and also wrote an article in
1928 titled "On the Arrival of Our Duce" to celebrate Jabotinsky's visit to
Palestine, and propose a new direction for the Revisionist movement, more in
line with Achimeir's views. (Segev, Tom, "The Seventh Million: Israelis and the
Holocaust" p.¬ 23.) When Ahimeir was on trial in 1932 for having disrupted a
public lecture at Hebrew University, his lawyer, Zvi Eliahu Cohen, argued "Were
it not for Hitler's anti-Semitism, we would not oppose his ideology. Hitler
saved Germany." Tom Segev has remarked, "This was not an unconsidered
outburst." An editorial in the Revisionist newspaper "Hazit Haam" praised
Cohen's "brilliant speech." It continued, that "Social Democrats of all stripes
believe that Hitler's movement is an empty shell (but) we believe that there is
both a shell and a kernel. The anti-Semitic shell is to be discarded, but not
the anti-Marxist kernel. The Revisionists would fight the Nazis only to the
extent that they were anti-Semites." (Segev, Tom, "The Seventh Million:
Israelis and the Holocaust" p.¬ 23). In 1933, when Hitler came to power, the
newspaper, whose editors were Revisionist Party members, praised Nazism as a
German national liberation movement and said that Hitler had saved Germany from
Communism. Jabotinsky responded by threatening to have the newspaper's editors
expelled if they repeated such "kow-towing" to Hitler. (Schechtman, "Fighter
and Prophet", p.¬ 216.) The national messianist wing differed from the
ideological vision of Jabotinsky to the extent that on August 9, 1932,
Jabotinsky wrote to tell Abba Ahimeir that his romantic ideas and the zeal of
his followers were considered excessive. "Hatzohar", he wrote, was a democratic
political movement of a patrician rather than populist or Romantic kind. As a
consequence, he argued, the behavior of Ahimeir and his friends threatened
Jabotinsky's own movement. He also argued that if Achimeir's views were indeed
similar to those which he expressed in his articles and letters, there was no
room for the two of them in the same political camp. Despite his flirt with
fascism, Ahimeir was also known for his fight against Nazism, with the most
visible example being his climb on the German embassy roof in Jerusalem taking
off the swastika flag. In later years, Ahimeir said he was sorry for calling
himself a "fascistan" (fascist sympathizer). Irgun to Likud. The Irgun largely
followed the Centrists' ideals but with a much more hawkish outlook toward
Britain's involvement in the Mandate, and an ardently nationalist vision of
society and government. After the establishment of the State of Israel, it was
the Irgun wing of the Revisionist Party that formed Herut, which in turn
eventually formed the Gahal party when the Herut and Liberal parties formed a
united list called Gush Herut Liberalim (or the Herut-Liberal Bloc). In 1977
the new Likud Party was formed by a group of parties dominated by the
Revisionist Herut/Gahal, became the dominant party in a governing coalition,
and remains an important force in Israeli politics until today. In March 2006,
the Likud lost many of its seats to the Kadima party. The Likud bounced back in
Israel's most recent Knesset elections, garnering 27 seats, although still less
than Kadima's 28 seats. However, because right-of-center parties who favored a
Likud-led coalition, comprised the majority, Likud was chosen to form the
coalition and leads the government today. In the years since the 1977 election,
particularly in the last decade, Likud has undergone a number of splits to its
right, including the 1998 departure of Benny Begin, son of Herut founder
Menachem Begin (he rejoined Likud in 2008), and in 2005 experienced a split to
its left with the departure of Ariel Sharon and his followers to form Kadima.
Although the party platform has been consistent with Revisionist ideology, most
supporters believe that prime ministers from the party have consistently
deviated from what many see as their mandate. The National Union and other
parties, such as Lieberman's Yisrael Beytenu now claim to be the true
representatives of Revisionist Zionism, and that Likud has abandoned its
ideology, which is by some evidence true, since although historically, does not
in complete form adhere to former Lehi or Irgunist principles. While the
initial core group of Likud leaders such as Israeli Prime Ministers Begin and
Yitzhak Shamir came from Likud's Herut faction, later leaders, such as Benjamin
Netanyahu, and Ariel Sharon have come from or moved to the "pragmatic"
Revisionist wing.
