Revolutions of 1848 The European Revolutions of 1848, known in some countries
as the Spring of Nations, Springtime of the Peoples or the Year of Revolution,
were a series of political upheavals throughout Europe in 1848. It was the only
Europe-wide collapse of traditional authority to date, but within a year,
reactionary forces had won out, and the revolutions collapsed. This
revolutionary wave began in France in February, and immediately spread to most
of Europe and parts of Latin America. Over 50 countries were affected, but with
no coordination or cooperation among the revolutionaries in different
countries. Five factors were involved: the widespread dissatisfaction with the
political leadership; the demand for more participation and democracy; the
demands of the working classes; the upsurge of nationalism; and finally, the
regrouping of the reactionary forces based in the royalty, the aristocracy, the
army, and the peasants. The uprisings were led by shaky "ad hoc" coalitions of
reformers, the middle classes and workers, but it could not hold together for
long. Tens of thousands of people were killed, and many more forced into exile.
The only significant lasting reforms were the abolition of serfdom in Austria
and Hungary, the end of absolute monarchy in Denmark, and the definitive end of
the Capetian monarchy in France. The revolutions were most important in France,
Germany, Poland, Italy, and the Austrian Empire, and did not reach Russia,
Great Britain, Spain, Sweden, Portugal, or the Ottoman Empire. Origins. These
revolutions arose from such a wide variety of causes that it is difficult to
view them as resulting from a coherent movement or social phenomenon. Numerous
changes had been taking place in European society throughout the first half of
the 19th century. Both liberal reformers and radical politicians were reshaping
national governments. Technological change was revolutionizing the life of the
working classes. A popular press extended political awareness, and new values
and ideas such as popular liberalism, nationalism and socialism began to
emerge. Some historians emphasize the serious crop failures, particularly those
of 1846, that produced hardship among peasants and the working urban poor.
Large swathes of the nobility were discontented with royal absolutism or near-
absolutism. In 1846, there had been an uprising of Polish nobility in Austrian
Galicia, which was only countered when peasants, in turn, rose up against the
nobles. Additionally, an uprising by democratic forces against Prussia occurred
in Greater Poland. Next, the middle classes began to agitate. Working-class
objectives tended to fall in line with those of the middle class. Although Karl
Marx and Friedrich Engels had written at the request of the Communist League in
London (an organization consisting principally of German workers) "The
Communist Manifesto" (published in German in London on February 21, 1848), once
they began agitating in Germany following the March insurrection in Berlin,
their demands were considerably reduced. They issued their "Demands of the
Communist Party in Germany" from Paris in March; the pamphlet only urged
unification of Germany, universal suffrage, abolition of feudal duties, and
similar middle-class goals. The middle and working classes thus shared a desire
for reform, and agreed on many of the specific aims. Their participations in
the revolutions, however, differed. While much of the impetus came from the
middle classes, much of the cannon fodder came from the lower. The revolts
first erupted in the cities. Urban workers. The population in French rural
areas had rapidly risen, causing many peasants to seek a living in the cities.
Many in the bourgeoisie feared and distanced themselves from the working poor.
Many unskilled laborers toiled from 12 to 15 hours per day when they had work,
living in squalid, disease-ridden slums. Traditional artisans felt the pressure
of industrialization, having lost their guilds. Revolutionaries such as Marx
built up a following. The situation in the German states was similar. Parts of
Prussia were beginning to industrialize. During the decade of the 1840s,
mechanized production in the textile industry brought about inexpensive
clothing that undercut the handmade products of German tailors. Reforms
ameliorated the most unpopular features of rural feudalism, while industrial
workers remained dissatisfied with these and pressed for greater change. Urban
workers had no choice but to spend half of their income on food, which
consisted of bread and potatoes. As a result of harvest failures, food prices
soared and the demand for manufactured goods decreased, causing an increase in
unemployment. During the revolution, to address the problem of unemployment,
workshops were organized for men interested in construction work. Officials
also set up workshops for women when they felt they were excluded. Artisans and
unemployed workers destroyed industrial machines when their social demands were
neglected. Rural areas. Rural population growth had led to food shortages, land
pressure, and migration, both within Europe and out from Europe, especially to
North America. In the years 1845 and 1846, a potato blight caused a subsistence
crisis in Northern Europe. The effects of the blight were most severely
manifested in the Great Irish Famine, but also caused famine-like conditions in
the Scottish Highlands and throughout continental Europe. Aristocratic wealth
(and corresponding power) was synonymous with the ownership of farm lands and
effective control over the peasants. Peasant grievances exploded during the
revolutionary year of 1848. Role of ideas. Despite forceful and often violent
efforts of established and reactionary powers to keep them down, disruptive
ideas gained popularity: democracy, liberalism, nationalism, and socialism. In
the language of the 1840s, 'democracy' meant universal male suffrage.
'Liberalism' fundamentally meant consent of the governed and the restriction of
church and state power, republican government, freedom of the press and the
individual. 'Nationalism' believed in uniting people bound by (some mix of)
common languages, culture, religion, shared history, and of course immediate
geography; there were also irredentist movements. At this time, what are now
Germany and Italy were collections of small states. 'Socialism' in the 1840s
was a term without a consensus definition, meaning different things to
different people, but was typically used within a context of more power for
workers in a system based on worker ownership of the means of production.
Events. Italian states. Although little noticed at the time, the first major
outbreak came in Sicily, starting in January 1848. There had been several
previous revolts against Bourbon rule; this one produced an independent state
that lasted only 16 months before the Bourbons came back. During those months,
the constitution was quite advanced for its time in liberal democratic terms,
as was the proposal of an Italian confederation of states. The failed revolt
was reversed a dozen years later as the Bourbon kingdom of the Two Sicilies
collapsed in 1860–61 with the Risorgimento. France. The "February Revolution"
in France was sparked by the suppression of the "campagne des banquets". This
revolution was driven by nationalist and republican ideals among the French
general public, who believed the people should rule themselves. It ended the
constitutional monarchy of Louis-Philippe, and led to the creation of the
French Second Republic. This government was headed by Louis-Napoleon, who,
after only four years, returned France to a monarchy with the establishment of
the Second French Empire in 1852. Alexis de Tocqueville remarked in his
"Recollections" of the period, "society was cut in two: those who had nothing
united in common envy, and those who had anything united in common terror."
German states. The "March Revolution" in the German states took place in the
south and the west of Germany, with large popular assemblies and mass
demonstrations. Led by well-educated students and intellectuals, they demanded
German national unity, freedom of the press, and freedom of assembly. The
uprisings were not well coordinated, but had in common a rejection of
traditional, autocratic political structures in the 39 independent states of
the German Confederation. The middle-class and working-class components of the
Revolution split, and in the end, the conservative aristocracy defeated it,
forcing many liberals into exile. Denmark. Denmark had been governed by a
system of absolute monarchy since the 17th century. King Christian VIII, a
moderate reformer but still an absolutist, died in January 1848 during a period
of rising opposition from farmers and liberals. The demands for constitutional
monarchy, led by the National Liberals, ended with a popular march to
Christiansborg on March 21. The new king, Frederick VII, met the liberals'
demands and installed a new Cabinet that included prominent leaders of the
National Liberal Party. The national-liberal movement wanted to abolish
absolutism, but retain a strongly centralized state. The king accepted a new
constitution agreeing to share power with a bicameral parliament called the
Rigsdag. Although army officers were dissatisfied, they accepted the new
arrangement which, in contrast to the rest of Europe, was not overturned by
reactionaries. The liberal constitution did not extend to Schleswig, leaving
the Schleswig-Holstein Question unanswered. Schleswig. Schleswig, a region
containing both Danes and Germans, was a part of the Danish monarchy, but
remained a duchy separate from the Kingdom of Denmark. Spurred by pan-German
sentiment, Germans of Schleswig took up arms to protest a new policy announced
by Denmark's National Liberal government, which would have fully integrated the
duchy into Denmark. The German population in Schleswig and Holstein revolted,
inspired by the Protestant clergy. The German states sent in an army, but
Danish victories in 1849 led to the Treaty of Berlin (1850) and the London
Protocols (1852). They reaffirmed the sovereignty of the King of Denmark, while
prohibiting union with Denmark. The violation of the latter provision led to
renewed warfare in 1863 and the Prussian victory in 1864. Habsburg Empire. From
March 1848 through July 1849, the Habsburg Austrian Empire was threatened by
revolutionary movements, which often had a nationalist character. The empire,
ruled from Vienna, included Austrian Germans, Hungarians, Slovenes, Poles,
Czechs, Croats, Slovaks, Ukrainians/Ruthenians, Romanians, Serbs and Italians,
all of whom attempted in the course of the revolution to either achieve
autonomy, independence, or even hegemony over other nationalities. The
nationalist picture was further complicated by the simultaneous events in the
German states, which moved toward greater German national unity. Hungary. The
Hungarian revolution of 1848 started on 15 March 1848, when Hungarian patriots
organized mass demonstrations in Pest and Buda (today Budapest) which forced
the Imperial governor to accept their 12 points of demands. This resulted in
Klemens von Metternich, the Austrian prince and foreign minister, resigning. In
turn, Emperor Ferdinand promised Hungary a constitution, an elected parliament,
and the end of censorship. The revolution grew into a war for independence from
the Austrian Empire when Josip Jelačić, Ban of Croatia, crossed the border to
restore Habsburg control. The new government, led by Lajos Kossuth, was
initially successful against the Habsburg forces, but eventually, after one and
a half years of fighting, the revolution was crushed when Russian Tsar Nicholas
I marched into Hungary with over 300,000 troops. Hungary was thus placed under
brutal martial law, with the Austrian government restored. In the long run, the
passive resistance following the revolution led to the Austro-Hungarian
Compromise (1867), which marked the birth of the Austro-Hungarian Empire.
Switzerland. Switzerland, already an alliance of republics, also saw major
internal struggle. The creation of the Sonderbund led to a short Swiss civil
war in November 1847. In 1848, a new constitution ended the almost-complete
independence of the cantons, and transformed Switzerland into a federal state.
Western Ukraine. The center of the Ukrainian national movement was in Eastern
Galicia. On April 19, 1848, a group of representatives led by the Greek
Catholic clergy launched a petition to the Austrian Emperor. It expressed
wishes that in those regions of Galicia where the Ruthenian (Ukrainian)
population represented majority, the Ukrainian language should be taught at
schools and used to announce official decrees for the peasantry; local
officials were expected to understand it and the Ruthenian clergy was to be
equalized in their rights with the clergy of all other denominations. On May 2,
1848, the Supreme Ruthenian (Ukrainian) Council was established. The Council
(1848-1851) was headed by the Greek-Catholic Bishop Gregory Yakhimovich and
consisted of 30 permanent members. Its main goal was the administrative
division of Galicia into Western (Polish) and Eastern (Ruthenian/Ukrainian)
parts within the borders of the Habsburg Empire, and formation of a separate
region with a political self-governance. Greater Poland. Polish people mounted
a military insurrection in the Grand Duchy of Poznań (or the Greater Poland
region) against the occupying Prussian forces. Danubian Principalities. A
Romanian liberal and Romantic nationalist uprising began in June in the
principality of Wallachia. Closely connected with the 1848 unsuccessful revolt
in Moldavia, it sought to overturn the administration imposed by Imperial
Russian authorities under the "Regulamentul Organic" regime, and, through many
of its leaders, demanded the abolition of boyar privilege. Led by a group of
young intellectuals and officers in the Wallachian military forces, the
movement succeeded in toppling the ruling Prince Gheorghe Bibescu, whom it
replaced with a provisional government and a regency, and in passing a series
of major liberal reforms, first announced in the Proclamation of Islaz.
Belgium. In Belgium, the uprisings were local and concentrated in the
industrial basins of the Provinces of Liège and Hainaut. A more or less
greater threat was coming from France, where among the seasonal workers,
Communism was spread by the small Communist clique of Belgium, basically the
people were brought into a Belgian Legion, with the promise of a free ride home
and money. The Belgian Legion would 'invade' Belgium by train and travel to
Brussels, where the government and monarchy had to be overthrown. Several
smaller groups managed to infiltrate Belgium, but the reinforced Belgian border
troops were successful in splitting up the larger groups of the Legion, and the
invasion eventually came to nothing. Ireland. The Young Irelander Rebellion of
1848 was a small, failed rebellion which broke out in Ballingarry, Co.
Tipperary. It was led by the Young Ireland movement, inspired by famine
conditions in Ireland and the 1848 rebellions throughout Europe. Other English-
speaking lands. Elsewhere in Britain, the middle classes had been pacified by
general enfranchisement in the Reform Act 1832; the consequent agitations,
violence, and petitions of the Chartist movement came to a head with their
peaceful petition to Parliament of 1848. The repeal in 1846 of the
protectionist agricultural tariffscalled the "Corn Laws"had defused some
proletarian fervour. The revolutions had little impact in British colonies,
aside from a modest influx of immigration from German-speaking lands. In the
United States, the main impact of the revolutions and their failure was
substantially increased immigration, especially from Germany. This, in turn,
fuelled the nativist "Know Nothing" movement in the years preceding the
American Civil War. The "Know Nothings" were opposed to immigration, especially
immigration of German and Irish Catholics and held the Pope, Pius IX,
responsible for the revolutions' failure. New Grenada. In Spanish Latin
America, the Revolution of 1848 appeared in New Grenada, where Colombian
students, liberals, and intellectuals demanded the election of General José
Hilario López. He took power in 1849 and launched major reforms, abolishing
slavery and the death penalty, and providing freedom of the press and of
religion. The resulting turmoil in Colombia lasted four decades; from 1851 to
1885, the country was ravaged by four general civil wars and 50 local
revolutions. Brazil. In Brazil, the "Praieira revolt", a movement in
Pernambuco, lasted from November 1848 to 1852. Unresolved conflicts left over
from the period of the regency and local resistance to the consolidation of the
Brazilian Empire that had been proclaimed in 1822 helped to plant the seeds of
the revolution. Legacy and memory. There were multiple memories of the
Revolutions. Democrats looked to 1848 as a democratic revolution, which in the
long run insured liberty, equality, and fraternity. Marxists denounced 1848 as
a betrayal of working-class ideals by a bourgeoisie indifferent to the
legitimate demands of the proletariat. For nationalists, 1848 was the
springtime of hope, when newly emerging nationalities rejected the old
multinational empires. They were all bitterly disappointed in the short run.
The year 1848, at best, was a glimmer of future hope, and at worst, it was a
deadweight that strengthened the reactionaries and delayed further progress. In
the post-revolutionary decade after 1848, little had visibly changed, and most
historians considered the revolutions a failure, given the seeming lack of
permanent structural changes. Nevertheless, there were a few immediate
successes for some revolutionary movements, notably in the Habsburg lands.
Austria and Prussia eliminated feudalism by 1850, improving the lot of the
peasants. European middle classes made political and economic gains over the
next 20 years; France retained universal male suffrage. Russia would later free
the serfs on February 19, 1861. The Habsburgs finally had to give the
Hungarians more self-determination in the "Ausgleich" of 1867. The revolutions
inspired lasting reform in Denmark, as well as the Netherlands. Exceptions.
Great Britain, the Netherlands, the Russian Empire (including Congress Poland),
and the Ottoman Empire were the only major European states to go without a
national revolution over this period. Sweden and Norway were little affected.
Serbia, though formally unaffected by the revolt as it was a part of the
Ottoman state, actively supported the Serbian revolution in the Habsburg
Empire. Russia's relative stability was attributed to the revolutionary groups'
inability to communicate with each other. In the Kingdom of Poland and the
Grand Duchy of Lithuania, uprisings took place in 1830–31 (the November
Uprising) and 1846 (the Kraków Uprising). A final revolt took place in
1863–65 (the January Uprising), but none occurred in 1848. Switzerland and
Portugal were also spared in 1848, though both had gone through civil wars in
the preceding years (the Sonderbund War in Switzerland and the Liberal Wars in
Portugal). The introduction of the Swiss Federal Constitution in 1848 was a
revolution of sorts, laying the foundation of Swiss society as it is today. In
the Netherlands, no major unrests appeared because the king, Willem II, decided
to alter the constitution to reform elections and effectively reduce the power
of the monarchy. While no major political upheavals occurred in the Ottoman
Empire as such, political unrest did occur in some of its vassal states. In
Serbia, feudalism was finally abolished in 1838, and power of the Serbian
prince was reduced with the Turkish constitution.
