Revolutionary socialism The term revolutionary socialism refers to socialist
tendencies that subscribe to the doctrine that a social revolution is necessary
in order to effect structural changes to society, and specifically, that
revolution is necessary to achieve socialism. Revolution is not necessarily
defined as a violent insurrection, rather, it is defined as the seizure of
political power by mass movements of the working class so that the state is
directly controlled by the working class as opposed to the capitalist class.
Revolutionary socialism includes a diverse range of social movements that might
define "revolution" differently from each other. It includes Leninism and
Marxism-Leninism, which are based on Vanguardism; revolutionary Syndicalism;
revolutionary democratic socialism and anarchism. It is used in contrast to the
reformism of social democracy, which is not anti-capitalist, and the advocacy
of gradually ameliorating the economic and social problems of capitalism.
Revolutionary socialism also exists in contrast to the concept of small
revolutionary groups seizing power without first achieving mass support, termed
Blanquism. Origins. In the Communist Manifesto, Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels
wrote: Scholars have pointed out that the term "revolution" as used by Marx,
Engels and their followers tends to refer to complete change of a social and
economic nature by a mass movement of the "immense majority" (as shown by the
quote above). In addition, if this revolutionary change was not opposed by the
existing ruling elite, Marx and Engels contended, it could be carried out
peacefully. By contrast, the Blanquist view emphasised the overthrow by force
of the ruling elite in government by an active minority of revolutionaries, who
then proceed to implement socialist change, disregarding the state of readiness
of society as a whole and the mass of the population in particular for
revolutionary change. The reformist viewpoint was introduced into Marxist
thought by Eduard Bernstein, one of the leaders of the Social Democratic Party
of Germany (SPD). From 1896 to 1898, Bernstein published a series of articles
entitled "Probleme des Sozialismus" ("Problems of Socialism"). These articles
led to a debate on revisionism in the SPD, and can be seen as the origins of a
reformist trend within Marxism. Vladimir Lenin attacked Bernstein’s position
in his "What is to be Done". When Bernstein first put forward his ideas the
majority of the SPD rejected them. The 1899 Congress of the SPD reaffirmed the
Erfurt programme, as did the 1901 congress. The 1903 congress denounced
"revisionist efforts". The First World War and Zimmerwald. However on 4 August
1914 the SPD members of the Reichstag voted for the government’s war budget,
while the French and Belgium socialists publicly supported their governments.
Vladimir Lenin, Leon Trotsky, Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg, together with
a small number of other Marxists opposed to the war, came together in the
Zimmerwald Conference in September 1915. This conference saw the beginning of
the end of the uneasy coexistence of revolutionary socialists and reformist
socialists in the Second International. The conference adopted a proposal by
Trotsky to avoid an immediate split with the Second International. At first
opposed to it, in the end Lenin voted for Trotsky's resolution to avoid a split
among anti-war socialists. In December, 1915 and March, 1916, eighteen Social
Democratic representatives, the Haase-Ledebour Group, voted against war
credits, and were expelled from the Social Democratic Party. Liebknecht wrote
"Revolutionary Socialism in Germany" in 1916, arguing that this group was not a
revolutionary socialist group, despite their refusal to vote for war credits,
further defining, in his view, what was meant by a revolutionary socialist. The
Russian revolution of 1917 and after. Many revolutionary socialists argue that
the Russian revolution of October 1917 led by Lenin and Leon Trotsky follows
the revolutionary socialist model of a revolutionary movement of the immense
majority. By contrast, the October revolution is portrayed as a putsch or coup
d'état along the lines of Blanquism. For these Marxists, the fact that the
Bolsheviks won a majority (in alliance with the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries)
in the second all-Russian congress of Soviets - democratically elected bodies -
which convened at the time of the October revolution, shows that they had
popular support of the masses of workers, peasants and soldiers, the vast
majority of Russian society. In his pamphlet, The Lessons of October, published
in 1923, Trotsky argued that military power lay in the hands of the Bolsheviks
before the October revolution was carried out but this power was not used
against the government until the Bolsheviks gained mass support. The mass of
the soldiers began to be led by the Bolshevik party after the 'July days' of
1917, and followed only the orders of the Military Revolutionary Committee
under the leadership of Trotsky in October (also termed the 'Revolutionary
Military Committee' in Lenin's collected works). Yet Trotsky only mobilised the
Military Revolutionary Committee to seize power on the advent of the Second
All-Russian Congress of Soviets of Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies, which began
on 25 October 1917. Following the Russian Revolution of 1917 the Third
International was founded. This International became widely identified with
Communism, but also defined itself in terms of revolutionary socialism.
However, in 1938, Trotskyists formed the Fourth International because they
thought that the Third International was lost to Stalinism; this latter
International became identified with revolutionary socialism. Emerging from the
Communist International, but critical of the post-1924 Soviet Union, the
Trotskyist tradition in Western Europe and elsewhere uses the term
'revolutionary socialism'. For instance, in 1932, the first issue of the first
Canadian Trotskyist newspaper, "The Vanguard", published an editorial,
"Revolutionary Socialism vs Reformism". Today, many Trotskyist groups advocate
"revolutionary socialism" as opposed to reformism, and are considered, and
consider themselves, "revolutionary socialists". Luxemburgism is another
revolutionary socialist tradition.
