Revolutionary movement Revolutionary movement (or revolutionary social
movement) is a specific type of social movement dedicated to carrying out a
revolution. Charles Tilly defines it as "a social movement advancing exclusive
competing claims to control of the state, or some segment of it". It is defined
more simply by Jeff Goodwin and James M. Jasper as "a social movement that
seeks, as minimum, to overthrow the government or state"; those definition are
consistent with those in other works. Social movement may want to make various
reforms, and gain some control of the state, but as long as they do not aim for
an "exclusive" control, they are not revolutionary. Social movements may become
more radical and revolutionary, and vice versa - revolutionary movements can
scale down their demands and agree to share powers with others, becoming a
political party. Goodwin distinguishes between a conservative (reformist) and
radical revolutionary movements, depending on how much of a change they want to
introduce. A conservative or reformist revolutionary movement will want to
change fewer elements of the soci-economic and cultural system that a radical
reformist movement (Godwin also notes that not all radical movements have to be
revolutionary). A radical revolutionary movement will thus want both to take an
exclusive control of the state, and to fundamentally transform one of more
elements of its society, economy or culture. An example of a conservative
revolutionary movement would be the American Revolutionary movement, or the
Mexican Revolutionary movement. Examples of a radical revolutionary movements
include Bolsheviks in Russia, Chinese Communist Party and other communist
movements in most of Southeast Asia and Cuba (which attempted to introduce
broad changes to economy), the movements of the Iranian Revolution against the
shah, and some Central American guerrilla movements. For a movement to be
considered revolutionary in a modern day United States it should call for a
change of the dominant economic system (capitalism) or the political system
(two party representative democracy). The same social movement may be viewed
differently depending on a given context (usually the government of the country
it is taking place). For example, Jack Goldstone notes that the human rights
movement can be seen as a regular social movement in the West, but it is a
revolutionary movement under oppressive regimes like in China. Another example
he mentions was the racial equality movement, which could be seen as
revolutionary few decades ago in South Africa, but now is just a regular social
movement. A revolutionary movement can be non-violent, although it is less
common than not. Revolutionary movements usually have a wider repertoire of
contention than non-revolutionary ones. Five crucial factors to the development
and success of a revolutionary movements include: mass discontent leading to
popular uprisings, dissident political movements with elite participation,
strong and unifying motivations across major parts of the society, a
significant political crisis affecting the state reducing its ability or will
to deal with the opposition (see political opportunity), and external support
(or at last, lack of interference on behalf of the state).
