Revolutionary Knitting Circle A Revolutionary Knitting Circle is an activist
group which uses craftivism (specifically knitting and other textile
handicrafts) in their efforts to bring about social change. The first
Revolutionary Knitting Circle group was founded in Calgary, Canada, by Grant
Neufeld in 2000. Since then, groups have formed across Canada, in the USA, and
in various parts of Europe. Purpose. Promoting community independence. They
hold that communities and nations are currently subject to the corporate rule
and that a goal of the Revolutionary Knitting Circles is to return them to
independence from that rule. While not advocating an end to trade (be it local
or international), the groups are working to build the capacity for all
necessary subsistence production at the community level. The theory being that,
with the ability to take care of all essential needs, communities will be in a
position to say no to trade deals they do not want. Breaking down social
divisions. The Revolutionary Knitting Circles oppose various social divisions,
including age, gender, race and class. The groups actively seek to include a
diverse range of people, from across those divisions, in cooperative efforts.
This goal is also served by having the groups often publicly represented by
youthful males (such as the founder). Given the common view of knitting as work
associated with middle- and lower-class women - typically older women - the
groups hope that this representation will help to counter stereotypes. Changing
how activism is done. The groups hope to increase participation in activism by
offering a different approach from the often intense, and sometimes hostile,
modes of activism most commonly associated with social justice movements.
History of Actions. The first major action initiated by the Revolutionary
Knitting Circle was the "Global Knit-In"[http://knitting.activist.ca/g8.html]
held during the 2002 G8 Summit. Groups in a number of cities and towns hosted
protest rallies featuring knitting outside of major corporate sites, especially
bank office towers. Notable among these was the mass rally held in Ottawa,
Canada - where protesters set up a 'social safety net' made of knitted squares.
In 2003 the group produced a pattern for white knitted arm-bands with a peace
symbol. Members of the Knitting Circles and other interested knitters produced
numerous arm-bands from the pattern which were worn in the mass peace marches
and rallies held that year. In 2004 the group produced a pattern for a banner
displaying the words "Peace Knits"[http://knitting.activist.ca/pattern/
peaceknits/]. The pattern called for individual 6 inch squares to be stitched
together - allowing for many knitters to contribute to a single banner.
