Ricardian equivalence The Ricardian equivalence proposition (also known as the
Barro–Ricardo equivalence theorem) is an economic theory holding that
consumers internalize the government's budget constraint: as a result, the
timing of any tax change does not affect their level of spending. Consequently,
Ricardian equivalence suggests that it does not matter whether a government
finances its spending with debt or a tax increase, because the effect on the
total level of demand in the economy is the same. Introduction. In its simplest
terms: governments can raise money either through taxes or by issuing bonds.
Since bonds are loans, they must eventually be repaid—presumably by raising
taxes in the future. The choice is therefore "tax now or tax later." Suppose
that the government finances some extra spending through deficits; i.e. it
chooses to tax later. This action might suggest to taxpayers that they will
have to pay higher tax in future. Taxpayers would put aside savings to pay the
future tax rise; i.e. they would willingly buy the bonds issued by the
government, and would reduce their current consumption to do so. The effect on
aggregate demand would be the same as if the government had chosen to tax now.
David Ricardo was the first to propose this possibility in the early nineteenth
century; however, he was unconvinced of it. Antonio De Viti De Marco elaborated
on Ricardian equivalence starting in the 1890s. Robert J. Barro took the
question up independently in the 1970s, in an attempt to give the proposition a
firm theoretical foundation. The proposition remains controversial. Ricardo and
war bonds. In "Essay on the Funding System" (1820) Ricardo studied whether it
makes a difference to finance a war with £20 million in current taxes or to
issue government bonds with infinite maturity and annual interest payment of
£1 million in all following years financed by future taxes. At the assumed
interest rate of 5%, Ricardo concluded that In other words, if people had
rational expectations they would be indifferent between the two systems, but
since they do not have them, they are subjected to a "Fiscal Illusion", which
distorts their decisions. Barro–Ricardo equivalence. In 1974, Robert J. Barro
provided some theoretical foundation for Ricardo's hesitant speculation The
model was an important contribution to the New Classical Macroeconomics, built
around the assumption of rational expectations. noting that "he Ricardian
equivalence proposition is presented in Ricardo". However, Ricardo himself was
skeptical of this equivalence. Criticisms. Ricardian equivalence requires
assumptions that have been seriously challenged. The perfect capital market
hypothesis is often held up for particular criticism because liquidity
constraints invalidate the assumed lifetime income hypothesis. International
capital markets also complicate the picture. In 1976, Martin Feldstein argued
that Barro ignored economic and population growth. He demonstrated that the
creation of public debt depresses savings in a growing economy. In that same
year, James M. Buchanan also faulted Barro's model, noting that "his is an age-
old question in public finance theory", one already mooted by Ricardo and
elaborated upon by De Viti. In 1977, Gerald P. O'Driscoll opined that Ricardo,
in expanding his treatment of this subject for an Encyclopædia Britannica
article, changed so many features of it as to result in a Ricardian
Nonequivalence Theorem. In 2009, Paul Krugman ignited a debate among notable
blogging economists and financial journalists when he grouped Barro with
"first-rate economists keep making truly boneheaded arguments against
[organizing Keynesian stimulus". Barro's response. In 1976, Barro recognized
that uncertainty may play a role in changing individual behavior. Nevertheless,
he argued, In 1989, Barro offered a number of defenses against various other
critiques. Empirical results. Ricardian equivalence has been the subject of
extensive empirical inquiry. Barro himself found some confirmation in post WW I
years.
