Right of conquest The right of conquest is the right of a conqueror to
territory taken by force of arms. It was traditionally a principle of
international law which has in modern times gradually given way until its
proscription after the Second World War when the crime of war of aggression was
first codified in the Nuremberg Principles and then finally, in 1974, as a
United Nations resolution 3314. Proponents state that this right acknowledges
the status quo, and that denial of the right is meaningless unless one is able
and willing to use military force to deny it. Further, the right was
traditionally accepted because the conquering force, being by definition
stronger than any lawfully entitled governance which it may have replaced, was
therefore more likely to secure peace and stability for the people, and so the
Right of Conquest legitimises the conqueror towards that end. The completion of
colonial conquest of much of the world (see the Scramble for Africa), the
devastation of World War I and World War II, and the alignment of both the
United States and the Soviet Union with the principle of self-determination led
to the abandonment of the right of conquest in formal international law. The
1928 Kellogg-Briand Pact, the post-1945 Nuremberg Trials, the UN Charter, and
the UN role in decolonization saw the progressive dismantling of this
principle. Simultaneously, the UN Charter's guarantee of the "territorial
integrity" of member states effectively froze out claims against prior
conquests from this process. Conquest and military occupation. After the
attempted conquests of Napoleon and up to the attempted conquests of Hitler,
the disposition of territory acquired under the principle of conquest had to,
according to international law, be conducted according to the existing laws of
war. This meant that there had to be military occupation followed by a peace
settlement. If there was a territorial cession, then there had to be a formal
peace treaty. In post-World War II times, when the international community
frowned on wars of aggression, not all wars involving territorial acquisitions
ended in a peace treaty. For example, the fighting in the Korean War ended in
an armistice, without any peace treaty covering it.
