Rights Rights are legal, social, or ethical principles of freedom or
entitlement; that is, rights are the fundamental normative rules about what is
allowed of people or owed to people, according to some legal system, social
convention, or ethical theory. Rights are of essential importance in such
disciplines as law and ethics, especially theories of justice and deontology.
Rights are often considered fundamental to civilization, being regarded as
established pillars of society and culture, and the history of social conflicts
can be found in the history of each right and its development. According to the
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, "rights structure the form of governments,
the content of laws, and the shape of morality as it is currently perceived."
The connection between rights and struggle cannot be overstated — rights are
not as much granted or endowed as they are fought for and claimed, and the
essence of struggles past and ancient are encoded in the spirit of current
concepts of rights and their modern formulations. Definitional issues. There is
considerable disagreement about what is meant precisely by the term "rights".
It has been used by different groups and thinkers for different purposes, with
different and sometimes opposing definitions, and the precise definition of
this principle, beyond having something to do with normative rules of some sort
or another, is controversial. One way to get an idea of the multiple
understandings and senses of the term is to consider different ways it is used.
Many diverse things are claimed as rights: There has been considerable debate
about what this term means within the academic community, particularly within
fields such as philosophy, law, deontology, logic, and political science. One
way to look at different senses of the term of "rights" is to examine
contrasting ideas about the concept. Natural rights versus legal rights. Some
thinkers see rights in only one sense while others accept that both senses have
a measure of validity. There has been considerable philosophical debate about
these senses throughout history. For example, Jeremy Bentham believed that
legal rights were the essence of rights, and he denied the existence of natural
rights; whereas Thomas Aquinas held that rights purported by positive law but
not grounded in natural law were not properly rights at all, but only a facade
or pretense of rights. Claim rights versus liberty rights. Liberty rights and
claim rights are the inverse of one another: a person has a liberty right
permitting him to do something only if there is no other person who has a claim
right forbidding him from doing so. Likewise, if a person has a claim right
against someone else, then that other person's liberty is limited. For example,
a person has a "liberty right" to walk down a sidewalk and can decide freely
whether or not to do so, since there is no obligation either to do so or to
refrain from doing so. But pedestrians may have an obligation not to walk on
certain lands, such as other people's private property, to which those other
people have a claim right. So a person's "liberty right" of walking extends
precisely to the point where another's "claim right" limits his or her freedom.
Positive rights versus negative rights. Though similarly named, positive and
negative rights should not be confused with "active rights" (which encompass
"privileges" and "powers") and "passive rights" (which encompass "claims" and
"immunities"). Individual rights versus group rights. There can be tension
between individual and group rights. A classic instance in which group and
individual rights clash is conflicts between unions and their members. For
example, individual members of a union may wish a wage higher than the union-
negotiated wage, but are prevented from making further requests; in a so-called
closed shop which has a union security agreement, only the union has a "right"
to decide matters for the individual union members such as wage rates. So, do
the supposed "individual rights" of the workers prevail about the proper wage?
Or do the "group rights" of the union regarding the proper wage prevail?
Clearly this is a source of tension. Other senses. Other distinctions between
rights draw more on historical association or family resemblance than on
precise philosophical distinctions. These include the distinction between civil
and political rights and economic, social and cultural rights, between which
the articles of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights are often divided.
Another conception of rights groups them into three generations. These
distinctions have much overlap with that between negative and positive rights,
as well as between individual rights and group rights, but these groupings are
not entirely coextensive. Rights and politics. Rights are often included in the
foundational questions that governments and politics have been designed to deal
with. Often the development of these socio-political institutions have formed a
dialectical relationship with rights. Rights about particular issues, or the
rights of particular groups, are often areas of special concern. Often these
concerns arise when rights come into conflict with other legal or moral issues,
sometimes even other rights. Issues of concern have historically included labor
rights, LGBT rights, reproductive rights, disability rights, patient rights and
prisoners' rights. With increasing monitoring and the information society,
information rights, such as the right to privacy are becoming more important.
Some examples of groups whose rights are of particular concern include animals,
and amongst humans, groups such as children and youth, parents (both mothers
and fathers), and men and women. Accordingly, politics plays an important role
in developing or recognizing the above rights, and the discussion about which
behaviors are included as "rights" is an ongoing political topic of importance.
The concept of rights varies with political orientation. Positive rights such
as a "right to medical care" are emphasized more often by left-leaning
thinkers, while right-leaning thinkers place more emphasis on negative rights
such as the "right to a fair trial". Further, the term "equality" which is
often bound up with the meaning of "rights" often depends on one's political
orientation. Conservatives and libertarians and advocates of free markets often
identify equality with equality of opportunity, and want equal and fair rules
in the process of making things, while agreeing that sometimes these fair rules
lead to unequal outcomes. In contrast, socialists often identify equality with
equality of outcome and see fairness when people have equal amounts of goods
and services, and therefore think that people have a right to equal portions of
necessities such as health care or economic assistance or housing. Etymology.
The Modern English word "right" derives from Old English "riht" or "reht", in
turn from Proto-Germanic "*riχtaz" meaning "right" or "direct", and ultimately
from Proto-Indo-European "*reg-to-" meaning "having moved in a straight line",
in turn from "*(o)reg'(a)-" meaning "to straighten or direct". In several
different Indo-European languages, a single word derived from the same root
means both "right" and "law", such as French "droit", Spanish "derecho", and
German "Recht". Many other words related to normative or regulatory concepts
derive from this same root, including "correct", "regulate", and "rex" (meaning
"king"), whence "regal" and thence "royal". Likewise many more geometric terms
derive from this same root, such as "erect" (as in "upright"), "rectangle"
(literally "right angle"), "straight" and "stretch". Like "right", the English
words "rule" and "ruler", deriving still from the same root, have both
normative or regulatory and geometric meanings (e.g. a ruler as in a king, or a
ruler as in a straightedge). Several other roots have similar normative and
geometric descendants, such as Latin "norma", whence "norm", "normal", and
"normative" itself, and also geometric concepts such as "normal vectors"; and
likewise Greek "ortho" and Latin "ordo", meaning either "right" or "correct"
(as in "orthodox", meaning "correct opinion") or "straight" or "perpendicular"
(as in "orthogonal", meaning "perpendicular angle"), and thence "order",
"ordinary", etc. History of rights. The specific enumeration of rights has
differed greatly in different periods of history. In many cases, the system of
rights promulgated by one group has come into sharp and bitter conflict with
that of other groups. In the political sphere, a place in which rights have
historically been an important issue, at present the question of who has what
legal rights is sometimes addressed by the constitutions of the respective
nations. Most historic notions of rights were authoritarian and hierarchical,
with different people being granted different rights, and some having more
rights than others. For instance, the right of a father to be respected by his
son did not indicate a duty upon the father to return that respect, and the
divine right of kings which permitted absolute power over subjects did not
leave room for many rights to be granted to the subjects themselves. In
contrast, modern conceptions of rights often emphasize liberty and equality as
among the most important aspects of rights, though conceptions of liberty (e.g.
positive or negative) and equality (e.g. of opportunity or of outcome)
frequently differ. See also. Outline of rights
