Right-wing politics In politics, right-wing describes an outlook or specific
position that accepts or supports social hierarchy or social inequality. Social
hierarchy and social inequality is viewed by those affiliated with the Right as
either inevitable, natural, normal, or desirable, whether it arises through
traditional social differences or from competition in market economies. It
typically accepts or justifies this position on the basis of natural law or
tradition. The political terms "Right" and "Left" were coined during the French
Revolution (1789–99), and referred to where politicians sat in the French
parliament; those who sat to the right of the chair of the parliamentary
president were broadly supportive of the institutions of the monarchist "Ancien
Régime". The original Right in France was formed as a reaction against the
Left, it comprised those politicians supporting hierarchy, tradition, and
clericalism. The use of the expression "la droite" ("the right") became
prominent in France after the restoration of the monarchy in 1815, when "le
droit" was applied to describe the Ultra-royalists. In English-speaking
countries it was not until the 20th century that people applied the terms
"right" and "left" to their own politics. Although the term originally
designated traditional conservatives and reactionaries, the usage of “right-
wing” has been extended to describe liberal conservatives, classical
liberals, libertarian conservatives, Christian democrats, and nationalists. The
left, right, and center are often associated with socialism, conservatism, and
liberalism respectively, in varying degrees. Some historians and social
scientists seek to reduce political beliefs to class, with left, right, and
center politicians representing the working, upper or middle classes. Others
draw attention to the role which religious, ethnic, and regional differences
play in democratic politics. History. The political term "right-wing"
originates from the French Revolution, when liberal deputies from the Third
Estate generally sat to the left of the president's chair, a habit which began
in the Estates General of 1789. The nobility, members of the Second Estate,
generally sat to the right. In the successive legislative assemblies,
monarchists who supported the Ancien Régime were commonly referred to as
rightists, because they sat on the right side. A major figure on the right was
Joseph de Maistre, who argued for an authoritarian form of conservatism.
Throughout the 19th century, the main line dividing Left and Right in France
was between supporters of the Republic and supporters of the Monarchy. On the
right, the Legitimists and Ultra-royalists held counter-revolutionary views,
while the Orléanists hoped to create a constitutional monarchy under their
preferred branch of the royal family, a brief reality after the 1830 July
Revolution. The centre-right Gaullists in post-World War II France advocated
considerable social spending on education and infrastructure development, as
well as extensive economic regulation, but limited the wealth redistribution
measures characteristic of social democracy. According to "The Cambridge
History of Twentieth-Century Political Thought", the Right has gone through
five distinct historical stages: (i) the reactionary right, which sought a
return to aristocracy and established religion; (ii) the moderate right, who
sought limited government and distrusted intellectuals; (iii) the radical
right, who favored a romantic and aggressive nationalism; (iv) the extreme
right, who proposed anti-immigration policies and implicit racism; and (v) the
neo-liberal right, who sought to combine a belief in a market economy and
economic deregulation with the traditional Right-wing beliefs in patriotism,
élitism, and law and order. Positions. The meaning of right-wing "varies
across societies, historical epochs, and political systems and ideologies."
According to "The Concise Oxford Dictionary of Politics", in liberal
democracies the political Right opposes socialism and social democracy. Right-
wing parties include conservatives, Christian democrats, classical liberals,
nationalists and, on the far Right, racists and fascists. There has been
considerable criticism of the reduction of politics to a simple left-right
axis. Friedrich Hayek suggests that it is incorrect to view the political
spectrum as a line, with socialists on the left, conservatives on the right,
and liberals in the middle. He places each group at the corner of a triangle.
Eatwell and O'Sullivan divide the Right into five types: 'reactionary',
'moderate', 'radical', 'extreme', and 'new'. Each of these "styles of thought"
are seen as "responses to the left", including both liberalism and socialism,
that have arisen since the French Revolution of 1789. The 'reactionary right'
looks toward the past and is "aristocratic, religious and authoritarian". The
'moderate right' is typified by the writings of Edmund Burke. It is tolerant of
change, provided it is gradual, and accepts some aspects of liberalism,
including the rule of law and capitalism, although it sees radical laissez-
faire and individualism as harmful to society. Often it promotes nationalism
and social welfare policies. The 'radical right' is a term developed after the
Second World War to describe groups as different as McCarthyism, the John Birch
Society, Thatcherism, the Republikaner Party in West Germany, and so on.
Eatwell stresses that this use has "major typological problems" and that the
term "has also been applied to clearly democratic developments."< It includes
right-wing populism and various other subtypes. The 'extreme right' has four
traits according to Roger Eatwell: "1)anti-democracy; 2) nationalism; 3)
racism; 4) the strong state". He adds that violence is now dropped as a
characteristic. The 'New Right' consists of the liberal conservatives, who
stress small government, free markets, and individual initiative. Other authors
make a distinction between the centre-right and the far right. Parties of the
centre-right generally support liberal democracy, capitalism, the market
economy (though they may accept government regulation to control monopolies),
private property rights, and a limited welfare state (for example government
provision of education and medical care). They support conservatism and
economic liberalism, oppose socialism and communism. The phrase far right, by
contrast, is used to describe those who favor an absolutist government, which
uses the power of the state to support the dominant ethnic group or religion
and often to criminalize other ethnic groups or religions. Typical examples of
leaders to whom the "far right" lable is often applied are Francisco Franco in
Spain and Augusto Pinochet in Chile. The US Department of Homeland Security
defines right-wing extremism as hate groups who target racial, ethnic or
religious minorities and may be dedicated to a single issue. The phrase is also
used to describe support for ethnic nationalism. Anti-communism. The original
use of "right-wing" in reference to communism had the conservatives on the
Right, the liberals in the center, and the communists on the Left. Both the
conservatives and the liberals were strongly anti-communist. As time went on,
however, conservatives accused liberals of being "soft on communism", and using
freedom of speech and freedom of religion as a cover for their hidden communist
sympathies. The history of the use of the term "right-wing" to mean anti-
communist is a complicated one. Early Marxist movements were at odds with the
traditional monarchies that ruled over much of the European continent at the
time. Many European monarchies outlawed the public expression of communist
views, and the Communist Manifesto, which began "A spectre is haunting Europe,"
stated that monarchs feared for their thrones. Advocacy of communism was
illegal in the Russian Empire, the German Empire and Austria-Hungary, the three
most powerful monarchies in continental Europe prior to World War I. Many
Monarchists (except Constitutional Monarchists) viewed inequality in wealth and
political power as resulting from a divine natural order. The struggle between
monarchists and communists was often described as a struggle between the Right
and the Left. By World War I however, in most European monarchies, the Divine
Right of Kings had become discredited and replaced by liberal and nationalist
movements. Most European monarchs became figureheads; elected governments held
the real power. The most conservative European monarchy, the Russian Empire,
was replaced by the communist Soviet Union. The Russian Revolution inspired a
series of other communist revolutions across Europe in the years 1917–1922.
Many of these, such as the German Revolution, were defeated by nationalist and
monarchist military units. In this period, nationalism began to be considered
right-wing, especially when it opposed the internationalism of the communists.
The 1920s and 1930s saw the fading of traditional right-wing politics. The
mantle of conservative anti-communism was taken up by the rising fascist
movements on the one hand, and by American-inspired liberal conservatives on
the other. When communist groups and political parties began appearing around
the world, as in the Republic of China in the 1920s, their opponents were
usually colonial authorities, and the term right-wing came to be applied to
colonialism. After World War II, communism became a global phenomenon, and
anti-communism became an integral part of the domestic and foreign policies of
the United States and its NATO allies. Conservatism in the post-war era
abandoned its monarchist and aristocratic roots, focusing instead on
patriotism, religion, and nationalism. Throughout the Cold War, colonial
governments in Asia, Africa, and Latin America turned to the United States for
political and economic support. Communists were also enemies of capitalism,
portraying Wall Street as the oppressor of the masses. The United States made
anti-communism the top priority of its foreign policy, and many American
conservatives sought to combat what they saw as communist influence at home.
This led to the adoption of a number of domestic policies that are collectively
known under the term "McCarthyism". While both liberals and conservatives were
anti-communist, the followers of Senator McCarthy were called right-wing, and
those on the Right called liberals who favored free speech, even for
communists, leftist. Economics. In France after the French Revolution, the
Right fought against the rising power of those who had grown rich through
commerce, and sought to preserve the rights of the hereditary nobility. They
were uncomfortable with capitalism, with the Enlightenment, with individualism,
and with industrialism and fought to retain traditional social hierarchies and
institutions. By the 19th century, the Right had shifted to support the newly
rich, and instead of favoring the nobility over industrialists, favored
capitalists over the working class. There are, however, still a few right-wing
movements today, notably American paleoconservatives, that are often in
opposition to capitalist ethics and the effects they have on society as a
whole, which they see as infringing upon or causing the decay of social
traditions or hierarchies that they see as essential for social order. In
modern times, "right-wing" is sometimes used to describe laissez-faire
capitalism. In Europe, capitalists formed alliances with the Right during their
conflicts with workers after 1848. In France, the Right's support of capitalism
can be traced to the late 19th century. The so-called neoliberal Right,
popularized by Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher, combines support for free
markets, privatisation, and deregulation with traditional right-wing support
for social conformity. Right-wing libertarianism (sometimes known as
libertarian conservatism or conservative libertarianism) supports a
decentralized economy based on economic freedom, and holds property rights,
free markets and free trade to be the most important kinds of freedom. Russell
Kirk believed that freedom and property rights were interlinked. Anthony
Gregory has written that right-wing libertarianism, "can refer to any number of
varying and at times mutually exclusive political orientations." He listed some
as: being "interested mainly in 'economic freedoms'"; following the
"conservative lifestyle of right-libertarians"; seeking "others to embrace
their own conservative lifestyle"; considering big business "as a great victim
of the state"; favoring a "strong national defense"; having "an Old Right
opposition to empire." He holds that the issue is not right or left but
"whether a person sees the state as a major hazard or just another institution
to be reformed and directed toward a political goal." Conservative
authoritarians and those on the far right have supported fascism and
corporatism. Nationalism. In France, nationalism was originally a left-wing and
Republican ideology. After the period of "boulangisme" and the Dreyfus Affair
nationalism became a trait of the right-wing . Right-wing nationalists sought
to define and defend a "true" national identity from elements deemed to be
corrupting that identity. Some were ethnic nationalists who, in accordance with
Social Darwinism, applied the concept of "survival of the fittest" to nations
and races. Right-wing nationalism was influenced by romantic nationalism, in
which the state derives its political legitimacy from the organic unity of
those it governs. This generally includes, the language, race, culture,
religion and customs of the "nation", all of which were "born" within its
culture. Linked with right-wing nationalism is cultural conservatism, which
supports the preservation of the heritage of a nation or culture, and often
sees deviations from cultural norms as an existential threat. Natural law and
traditionalism. Right-wing politics typically justifies a hierarchical society
on the basis of natural law or tradition. Traditionalism was advocated by a
group of U.S. university professors (labeled the "New Conservatives" by the
popular press) who rejected the notions of individualism, liberalism,
modernity, and social progress, and sought instead to promote cultural and
educational renewal, and a revived interest in what T. S. Eliot referred to as
"the permanent things" (those perennial truths which endure from age to age and
those basic institutions that ground society such as the church, the family,
the state, and community life.) The term "family values" has been used as a
buzzword by right-wing parties such as the Republican Party in the United
States, the Family First Party in Australia, the Conservative party in the
United Kingdom and the Bharatiya Janata Party in India to describe support for
traditional families, and opposition to the changes the modern world has made
in how families live. Right-wing supporters of "family values" may oppose
abortion, euthanasia, homosexuality, and adultery. Populism. Right-wing
populism is a combination of ethno-nationalism with anti-elitism, using
populist rhetoric to provide a radical critique of existing political
institutions. According to Margaret Canovan, a right-wing populist is "...a
charismatic leader, using the tactics of politicians’ populism to go past the
politicians and intellectual elite and appeal to the reactionary sentiments of
the populace, often buttressing his claim to speak for the people by the use of
referendums." In Europe, right-wing populism often takes the form of distrust
of the European Union, and of politicians in general, combined with anti-
immagrant rhetoric, and a call for a return to traditional, national values.
Religion. Government support for an established religion was associated with
the original French "right wing." Joseph de Maistre argued for the indirect
authority of the Pope over temporal matters. According to Maistre, only
governments founded upon a Christian constitution, implicit in the customs and
institutions of all European societies but especially in Catholic European
monarchies, could avoid the disorder and bloodshed that followed the
implementation of rationalist political programs, as in the French Revolution.
The Church of England was established by Henry VIII. Some churchmen are given
seats in the House of Lords but are considered politically neutral, rather than
right or left wing. The Christian right is a major force in the West. They
generally support laws upholding religious values, and also laws limiting
immigration. In India, Hindu nationalism is considered a part of the right-
wing. The Hindu nationalist movement has attracted privileged groups fearing
encroachment on their dominant positions, and also "plebeian" and impoverished
groups seeking recognition around a majoritarian rhetoric of cultural pride,
order, and national strength. Many Islamist groups have been called "right
wing" including the Great Union Party, and the Combatant Clergy Association/
Association of Militant Clergy and the Islamic Society of Engineers of Iran.
Religious fundamentalists frequently feel that governments should enact laws
supporting their religious tenets. The religious Right may be in conflict with
scientific positions on evolution and other matters where science disagrees
with dogma. Social stratification. Right-wing politics involves in varying
degrees the rejection of egalitarian objectives of left-wing politics, claiming
either that inequality is natural and inevitable or that it is beneficial to
society. Right-wing ideologies and movements support social order. The original
French right-wing was called "the party of order" and held that France needed a
strong political leader to keep order. British conservative scholar R. J.
White, who rejects egalitarianism, wrote: "Men are equal before God and the
laws, but unequal in all else; hierarchy is the order of nature, and privilege
is the reward of honourable service". American conservative Russell Kirk also
rejects egalitarianism as imposing sameness, stating: "Men are created
different; and a government that ignores this law becomes an unjust government
for it sacrifices nobility to mediocrity". He took as one of the "canons" of
conservatism the principle that "civilized society requires orders and
classes". Right libertarians reject collective or state-imposed equality as
undermining reward for personal merit, initiative, and enterprise. In their
view, it is unjust, limits personal freedom, and leads to social uniformity and
mediocrity.
