Social Democratic Party (Japan) The Social Democratic Party (社会民主党
"Shakai Minshu-tō", often abbreviated to 社民党 "Shamin-tō"; also known as
the Social Democratic Party of Japan (abbreviated to SDPJ or SDP in English) is
a political party that advocates for the establishment of a socialist Japan. It
now defines itself as a social democratic party. The party was founded in
January 1996 by the majority of legislators of the defunct Japan Socialist
Party (JSP), which was Japan's largest opposition party in the 1955 system.
Five leftist legislators didn't join the SDP and formed the New Socialist Party
that lost all its seats in the following elections. The JSP enjoyed a short
period of government participation from 1993 to 1994 (Hosokawa cabinet) and
later formed a coalition government with the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP)
under Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama (from the JSP) from 1994 to January
1996. The SDP was part of ruling coalitions between January and November 1996
(first Hashimoto cabinet) and from 2009 to 2010 (Hatoyama cabinet). As of
October 2010, it has 10 representatives in the national diet. History.
Socialist and Social-Democratic parties have been active in Japan, under
various names, since the early 20th Century—often suffering harsh government
repression as well as ideological dissensions and splits. The SDP was
originally known as the Japanese Socialist Party (日本社会党 "Nihon
Shakai-tō"), or JSP, and was formed in 1945, following the fall of the
militarist regime which had led Japan into the Second World War. At the time,
though, there was serious conflict inside the party among factions of the right
and the left, and the official name in English became the "Social Democratic
Party of Japan" (SDPJ), as the right had argued. On the other hand, the left
wanted to use the older "JSP." The party became the largest political party in
the first general election under the Constitution of Japan in 1947 (143 of 466
seats), and a government was formed by Tetsu Katayama, forming a coalition with
the Democratic Party of Japan and the Citizens' Cooperation Party. However, due
to the rebellion of Marxists in the party, the Katayama government collapsed.
The party continued the coalition with the Democrats under prime minister
Hitoshi Ashida; but the cabinet was engulfed by the Shōwa Denkō scandal, the
largest corruption scandal during the occupation, allowing Shigeru Yoshida and
the Liberal Party to return to government. The party was split in 1950/1951
into the Rightist Socialist Party, consisting of socialists who leaned more to
the center, while the Leftist Socialist Party was formed by hardline left-
wingers and Marxist-Socialists. And, the farthest left faction formed a small
independent party, the Workers and Farmers Party, and espoused Maoism from 1948
to 1957. The two socialist parties were merged in 1955, reunifying and
recreating the Japan Socialist Party (the official name was SDPJ again). The
new opposition party had its own factions, although organized according to
left-right ideological beliefs rather than what it called the "feudal
personalism" of the conservative parties. In the House of Representatives
election of 1958, the Japan Socialist Party gained 32.9 percent of the popular
vote and 166 out of 467 seats. This was enough result to block the attempt of
constitutional amendment by Kishi Nobusuke government. However, the party was
again split in 1960 because of internal conflicts and the assassination of
Inejiro Asanuma, and the breakaway group (a part of the old Right Socialist
Party of Japan, their most moderate faction) created the Democratic Socialist
Party, though the Japan Socialist Party was preserved. After that, the JSPs
percentage of the popular vote and number of seats gradually declined. The
party performed well on a local level, however: by the Seventies, many areas
were run by SDPJ mayors and governors, who introduced innovative and popular
new social programmes. 1980s. In the double election of July 1986 for both Diet
houses, the party suffered a rout by the LDP under Yasuhiro Nakasone: its seats
in the lower house fell from 112 to an all-time low of eighty-five and its
share of the vote from 19.5 percent to 17.2 percent. But its popular
chairwoman, Takako Doi, led it to an impressive showing in the February 1990
general election: 136 seats and 24.4 percent of the vote. Some electoral
districts had more than one successful socialist candidate. Doi's decision to
put up more than one candidate for each of the 130 districts represented a
controversial break with the past because, unlike their LDP counterparts, many
Japan Socialist Party candidates did not want to run against each other. But
the great majority of the 149 socialist candidates who ran were successful,
including seven of eight women. Doi, a university professor of constitutional
law before entering politics, had a tough, straight-talking manner that
appealed to voters tired of the evasiveness of other politicians. Many women
found her a refreshing alternative to submissive female stereotypes, and in the
late 1980s the public at large, in opinion polls, voted her their favorite
politician (the runner-up in these surveys was equally tough-talking
conservative LDP member Shintarō Ishihara). Doi's popularity, however, was of
limited aid to the party. The powerful Shakaishugi Kyokai (Japan Socialist
Association), which was supported by a hard-core contingent of the party's
76,000-strong membership, remained committed to doctrinaire Marxism, impeding
Doi's efforts to promote what she called perestroika and a more moderate
program with greater voter appeal. In 1983 Doi's predecessor as chairman,
Masashi Ishibashi, began the delicate process of moving the party away from its
strong opposition to the Self-Defense Forces. While maintaining that these
forces were unconstitutional in light of Article 9, he claimed that, because
they had been established through legal procedures, they had a "legitimate"
status (this phrasing was changed a year later to say that the Self-Defense
Forces "exist legally"). Ishibashi also broke past precedent by visiting
Washington to talk with United States political leaders. By the end of the
decade, the party had accepted the Self-Defense Forces and the 1960 Japan-
United States Treaty of Mutual Cooperation and Security. It advocated strict
limitations on military spending (no more than 1 percent of GNP annually), a
suspension of joint military exercises with United States forces, and a
reaffirmation of the "three nonnuclear principles" (no production, possession,
or introduction of nuclear weapons into Japanese territory). Doi expressed
support for "balanced ties" with the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
(North Korea) and the Republic of Korea (South Korea). In the past, the Japan
Socialist Party had favored the Kim Il-sung regime in Pyongyang, and in the
early 1990s it still refused to recognize the 1965 normalization of relations
between Tokyo and Seoul. In domestic policy, the party demanded the continued
protection of agriculture and small business in the face of foreign pressure,
abolition of the consumption tax, and an end to the construction and use of
nuclear power reactors. As a symbolic gesture to reflect its new moderation, at
its April 1990 convention the party dropped its commitment to "socialist
revolution" and described its goal as "social democracy": the creation of a
society in which "all people fairly enjoy the fruits of technological
advancement and modern civilization and receive the benefits of social
welfare." Delegates also voted Doi a third term as party chairwoman. Because of
the party's self-definition as a class-based party and its symbiotic
relationship with Sohyo, the public-sector union confederation, few efforts
were made to attract nonunion constituencies. Although some Sohyo unions
supported the Japan Communist Party, the Japan Socialist Party remained the
representative of Sohyo's political interests until the merger with private-
sector unions and Rengo in 1989. Because of declining union financial support
during the 1980s, some Japan Socialist Party Diet members turned to dubious
fund-raising methods. One was involved in the Recruit affair. The Japan
Socialist Party, like others, sold large blocks of fund-raising party tickets,
and the LDP even gave individual Japan Socialist Party Diet members funds from
time to time to persuade them to cooperate in passing difficult legislation.
1990s. The JSP acquired seventy seats (down from 137) in the July 1993 House of
Representatives election, while the LDP lost its majority in the lower house
for the first time since the 1983 election and was out of government for the
first time in 38 years. The anti-LDP coalition government of Morihiro Hosokawa
was formed by reformists who had triggered the 1993 election by leaving the LDP
(Japan Renewal Party, New Party Sakigake), a liberal party formed only a year
before (Japan New Party), the traditional centre-left opposition (Kōmeitō,
Democratic Socialist Party, Social Democratic Federation) and the Democratic
Reform Party, the political arm of the Rengō trade union federation, together
with the JSP. In 1994, however, the JSP and the New Sakigake Party decided to
leave the non-LDP coalition. The minority Hata cabinet lasted only a few weeks.
The JSP then formed a "Grand Coalition" ("dai-renritsu") government with the
LDP (and the New Party Sakigake) under Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama, leader
of the party from 1993 to 1996. Most of the other parties from the anti-LDP
coalition, now forced back into opposition, united to form the New Frontier
Party, overtaking the JSP as second largest party. In January 1996, the New
Socialist Party split off, Murayama resigned as prime minister, and the JSP
changed its name from Japan Socialist Party to Social Democratic Party (SDP) as
an interim party for forming a new party. However, a movement for transforming
SDP into a new "social democratic and liberal" party was unsuccessful. Under
Murayama's successor Ryūtarō Hashimoto (LDP), the SDP remained part of the
ruling coalition. Between 1993 and 1996, the had party lost the majority of its
members of the House of Representatives, mainly to predecessors of the
Democratic Party of Japan (DPJ) that was formed in 1996, but also some to the
NFP and other opposition parties. After its electoral defeat in 1996 when it
lost another 15 of its remaining 30 seats in the lower house, the SDP left the
ruling coalition which it had entered as the second largest force in Japanese
politics as a minor party. Recent events. The Social Democratic Party won six
seats in the general elections of November 9, 2003, compared with 18 seats in
the previous elections of 2000. Its motives against the Self-Defense Forces
have reverted into abolishing it in the long term, returning into its
opposition against the force it had applied in the 1950s. Doi had been the
leader since 1996, but she resigned in 2003, taking responsibility for the
election losses. Mizuho Fukushima was elected as the new party leader in
November 2003. In the Upper House Elections of 2004, SDP won only two seats,
thus having five seats in the Japanese Upper House and six seats in the Lower
House. In 2006 the party unexpectedly gained the governorship of Shiga.
Minshuto made large gains and the SDP maintained its base of 7 seats in the
2009 elections, becoming a junior partner in a new left government coalition.
However, in May 2010 disagreements over the issue of the Futenma US base led to
the sacking of Fukushima from the cabinet on Friday May 28, and the SDP
subsequently voted to leave the ruling coalition. As of October 2010, the SDP
has 6 members in the house of representatives and 4 members in the house of
councilors. Motions against Yoshihiko Noda. On August 3, 2012 the party in
concert with six other minor opposition parties (People's Life First, Kizuna
Party, Japanese Communist Party, Your Party, New Party Nippon (which has no
lower-house lawmaker) and the New Renaissance Party) agreed to submit a no
confidence motion against Prime Minister Yoshihiko Noda in an effort to block
the passage of the bill raising Japan's consumption tax from 5% to 10%. In the
Japanese diet the support of 51 lawmakers is required to submit a co-confidence
motion to the lower house. The motion was submitted to the lower house on
August 7, along with a censure motion against Noda. The main opposition Liberal
Democratic Party was also considering its own no-confidence motion and censure
motions if Noda did not agree to call a general election. The no-confidence
motion was voted down 246 to 86, with the DPJ voting against and the LDP and
its partner New Komeito deciding to be absent from the vote after Noda agreed
to hold elections "soon". On August 29, 2012 the House of Councillors passed a
censure motion against Noda based on the one previously submitted by the seven
opposition parties. The LDP and New Komeito had also been preparing their own
censure motion but in the end the LDP, which had supported Noda's consumption
tax increase, supported the censure motion of the other seven parties, while
New Komeito abstained. While the censure motion was non-binding, the opposition
parties planned to boycott the remaining sitting days before the diet session
finished on September 8, preventing further legislation from being passed.
