Right of foreigners to vote Suffrage, the right to vote in a particular
country, generally derives from citizenship. In most countries, the right to
vote is reserved to those who possess the citizenship of the country in
question. Some countries, however, have extended suffrage rights to non-
citizens. Suffrage rights extended to non-citizens are often restricted or
limited in some ways, with the details of the restrictions or limitations
varying from one country to another. Overview. In some cases, the United States
being one such case, some subnational entities have granted voting rights to
non-citizens. Conceptions of subnational citizenship have been reasons to grant
this right to those normally excluded from it. Other countries have granted
voting rights to non-citizens who hold citizenship of a country which is a
fellow member of a supranational organization (e.g. members of the European
Union). In a few cases, countries grant voting rights to citizens and non-
citizens alike. In a 2003 paper, David C. Earnest (then a graduate research
assistant at George Washington University) surveyed practice of voting rights
for resident aliens (or immigrants), concluding that although the practice is
surprisingly widespread, the details varied considerably from country to
country. After receiving his Doctorate in 2004, Dr. Earnest published a further
paper examining the political incorporation of aliens in three European
democracies: Germany, Belgium and the Netherlands. Supranational groupings. A
number of separate supranational groupings of countries exist, and membership
in some of these groupings may involve multinational agreements and treaties in
which member countries agree to some degree of reciprocity regarding voting
rights. Some individual countries are members of more than one supranational
groupings, and some supranational groupings of countries are members of other
supranational groupings of countries. European Union (EU). The 1992 Maastricht
Treaty imposed reciprocity inside the European Union concerning voting rights
in local elections; this already existed for the European elections. In several
European states, the public debate on the right of foreigners to vote was
therefore renewed, as some foreign residents had the right to vote (European
foreign residents) while others, non-Europeans, did not. As a result of this
debate, Luxembourg, Lithuania, Slovenia and Belgium extended the right to vote,
in different manners, to all foreign residents (which was already the case in
Sweden, Denmark, Finland and Netherlands). The European Parliament, the Council
of Europe and the Baltic Sea States Conference have produced various
recommendations in favor of the introduction of the right to vote and of
eligibility to all foreign residents in local elections. The 1992 Convention on
the Participation of Foreigners in Public Life at Local Level from the Council
of Europe, is opened to signatures and ratifications. Commonwealth of Nations
(CN). The Commonwealth of Nations (CN), usually known as the "Commonwealth" and
formerly as the "British Commonwealth", is a voluntary association of over 50
independent sovereign states, most of which are former colonies of the British
Empire. A few Commonwealth countries, including the United Kingdom itself,
allow Commonwealth citizens (formerly "British subjects") voting and/or
eligibility rights at all levels, either with or without specific restrictions
not applying to local citizens: Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados, Belize,
Dominica, Grenada, Guyana, Jamaica, Malawi (all foreign residents, not only
Commonwealth citizens), Mauritius, Namibia (all foreign residents, not only
Commonwealth citizens), New Zealand (all foreign residents, before 1975 only
Commonwealth citizens), Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines. Individual national cases. Antigua and Barbuda. (CN member)
Commonwealth citizens may vote and are eligible for parliamentary elections,
but "allegiance to a foreign State" is a criterion for ineligibility.
Argentina. Article 61 of the Constitution of the city of Buenos Aires states
that ""Suffrage is free, equal, secret, universal, compulsory and not
accumulative. The foreign residents enjoy this right, with the correlative
obligations, on equal terms with Argentine citizens registered in this
district, in the terms established by the law"." Australia. (CN member)
National voting rights were granted to Commonwealth citizens from 1960 to 1984.
In 1984, 1947 legislation which had allowed non-citizen voting was repealed,
but voters registered before 1984 retained their voting rights. Austria. (EU
member) In 2002, non-citizens were granted voting rights in state elections in
Vienna, but the decision was overturned by the Constitutional Court in June
2004. EU nationals may vote and stand for office in local elections (in Vienna
only at borough level, because Vienna is a state of Austria and not a local
municipality). Barbados. (CN member) As of 1990, Commonwealth citizens may vote
for parliamentary elections with a 3 years residency requirement. Belgium. (EU
member) European Union residents in Belgium were given the right to vote and to
be candidates for the 1994 European Parliament election, then for the 2000
Municipal elections. They had however first only the right to be elected as
municipal councillors, not at the executive level (schepen/alderman or
burgomaster/mayor), the alderman level was only opened for them from the 2006
Municipal elections, the mayor level may not be opened to them because it
includes a function of administrative police. In conformance with EU
regulations, EU residents are submitted to the same residence conditions as
Belgian nationals, i.e. residence in the commune at the closure date of the
electoral roll (July 31 for the municipal elections). In 2004, voting rights in
municipal elections were extended to non-European Union foreigners living in
Belgium, with certain conditions attached. Non-EU foreigners must have been
living in Belgium for at least five years before becoming entitled to vote. Any
non-EU foreigner who wants to take advantage of the new legislation must also
sign an oath of allegiance to the Belgian constitution, formally agree to
respect the country’s laws and sign the European Convention on Human Rights.
Also, non-EU foreigners are not allowed to stand as candidates. As voting is
compulsory in Belgium, and all electors are automatically on the electoral
rolls (extracted from a computerized National Register), foreign residents have
to enlist voluntarily on the electoral roll, then only they are submitted to
the compulsory vote. At the 2006 Municipal elections, only 20.9% (110,973 out
of 529,878) of the potential EU voters enlisted (17.6%, or 87,858 out of
498,315 at the 2000 Municipal elections), and 15.7% (17,065 out of 108,607) of
the potential non-EU voters. Belize. (CN member) Commonwealth citizens who are
domiciled or have resided in the country for at least one year immediately
before polling day are qualified as electors, but not for eligibility to the
House of Representatives, which requires Belize citizenship. Bolivia. In 1994,
the constitution was changed to allow non-citizens to vote in local elections.
As of 2007, this has not been implemented. Brazil. Article 12.1 of the states
that ""The rights inherent to Brazilians "(before 1994 Constitutional
amendment, "born Brazilians")" shall be attributed to Portuguese citizens
permanently resident in Brazil if Brazilians are afforded reciprocal treatment,
except in the events set forth in this Constitution".", article 14 that
""Foreigners cannot register as voters"", and ""The conditions for eligibility,
according to the law, are the following: I. Brazilian nationality" (...)". A
Treaty of friendship, cooperation and consultation between Brazil and Portugal
was signed on April 22, 2000 and promulgated in 2001 by Decree nr. 3.927/2001.
Practically, the Portuguese citizen regularly residing in Brazil and wishing to
enjoy the "Equality Status" ("Estatuto de Igualdade") without losing his
original citizenship has to apply to the Ministry of Justice. The conditions to
enjoy political rights are: to be residing in Brazil for 3 years, to be able to
read and write Portuguese and to enjoy political rights in Portugal. Bulgaria.
(EU member) In February 2005, the Bulgarian Constitution was modified, an
article 42, a third paragraph was added to Article 42, stating ""The elections
for the European Parliament and the participation of European Union citizens in
the elections for local authorities shall be regulated by law"". Canada. (CN
member) Voting rights at the federal level in Canada are exclusively limited to
Canadian citizens. British Columbia. The 1984 Election Amendment Act (Bill 20)
put an end to the faculty of inscription on the electoral rolls of British
citizens in British Columbia. New Brunswick. For the 1995 New Brunswick
provincial elections, a person qualified to vote had to be a Canadian citizen
or a British subject who was resident in the province prior to January 1, 1979.
For the 1999 elections, the qualification was limited to Canadian citizens.
Nova Scotia. For the 2003 and 2006 provincial elections in Nova Scotia, to be
eligible to vote, a person had still to be either a Canadian citizen or a
British subject. On November 25, 2001, an amendment to the Elections Act
removed being a British subject as a qualification for registration as an
elector but provided that this change would not be not effective until the
second general election that was to be held after this amendment came into
force. Ontario. The 1985 Equality Rights Statute Law Amendment Act put an end
to municipal and scholar elections voting rights for British citizens in
Ontario. Those who could vote before the Act kept their voting rights up to
July 1, 1988, the legal waiting period for the introduction of a request for
naturalization. Saskatchewan. British subjects (other than Canadian citizens)
are entitled to vote if they were qualified electors at the time of the
Saskatchewan provincial general election held on June 23, 1971. Cape Verde.
Article 24 of the Cape Verde Constitution states that The website of the
governmental Institute of Cape Verde Communities states that such a measure was
adopted ""to stimulate reciprocity from host countries of Cape Verdian
migrants"". A law nr. 36/V/97 was promulgated on August 25, 1997 regulating the
"Statute of Lusophone Citizen", concerning nationals from any country member of
the Community of Portuguese Language Countries (article 2), stating in its
article 3 that ""The lusophone citizen with residence in Cape Verde is
recognized the active and passive electoral capacity for municipal elections,
under conditions of the law. The lusophone citizen with residence in Cape Verde
has the right to exercise political activity related to his electoral
capacity."". Chile. The 1980 Chilean Constitution states in its article 14 that
""Foreigners residing in Chile for more than five years and who comply with the
requirements prescribed in the first paragraph of Article 13, may exercise the
right to vote in the cases and in the manner determined by law."". Article 13
states that ""Citizens are those Chileans who have reached the age of eighteen
years and who have never been sentenced to afflictive punishment."". A 2012
constitutional reform introduced a second line to article 14, by which
eligibility rights of naturalized citizens to run for office only occur 5 years
after being granted a naturalization card. Colombia. In 1991, the constitution
was changed to allow noncitizens to vote in local elections, but the changes
were not immediately implemented. On July 31, 2006, Colombia approved voting by
foreigners for mayors and city council elections. To vote, foreigners must have
been residents of Colombia for 5 years and must register with the electoral
authorities. Voting is not compulsory and voting aliens have the same voting-
related privileges citizens would. Cyprus. (EU and CN member) Article 8 of the
2004 Local Elections Act (Nationals of Other Member States) (Ν.98(Ι)/2004)
allows EU residents to vote at local elections. Voters have to register, once
registered they are submitted to compulsory voting like Cyprus citizens. EU
voters may not stand for election as mayor or chairman of the council and, if
elected to the local council, they may not hold the office of deputy mayor or
deputy chairman. Article 9(2) of the 2004 Law on Election of Members to the
European Parliament (N.10(I)/2004) allows EU residents to vote and be candidate
at the European Parliament elections. Czech Republic. (EU member) In December
2001, voting rights in local elections were approved for ""any natural person
who has reached the age of 18, is a citizen of a foreign country and has
permanent residence registered in the municipality, if an international treaty
by which the Czech Republic is bound and which has been promulgated so
stipulates."" In November 2002, only EU nationals benefited from such a treaty.
An Act on elections to the European Parliament was adopted in March 2003.
Denmark. (EU member) Voting and eligibility rights were granted to Nordic
Passport Union country citizens with a 3 years residence condition for
municipal and county elections in 1977. These rights were extended to all
foreign residents in 1981. In 1995, the 3 years residence requirement was
abolished for EU residents, in conformity with the European legislation, and
also for Nordic residents. Dominica. (CN member) Commonwealth citizens may vote
for parliamentary elections. They are not eligible for direct elections to the
House of Assembly, but may be appointed or elected as senators (9 members of
the parliament who may either be appointed by the president or elected by the
other members of the House of Assembly). "Allegiance to a foreign State" is a
criterion for ineligibility. Estonia. (EU member) Article 156 of the 1992
states that ""Any person who has reached the age of 18 and resides permanently
in the territory of that local government will have the right to vote in
accordance with the Constitution and the law."". In 1996, all foreign residents
were granted voting, but not eligibility, rights, for municipal elections with
a 5 years residence condition. In March 2002, a new Local Government Elections
Act was adopted to conform with European legislation, granting EU residents the
same voting and eligibility rights for municipal elections. Finland. (EU
member) Voting and eligibility rights were granted to Nordic Passport Union
country citizens without residence condition for municipal elections in 1981.
These rights were extended to all foreign residents in 1991 with a 2 years
residence condition. In 1995 (Law 365/95, confirmed by Electoral Law 714/1998),
the residence requirement was abolished for EU residents, in conformity with
the European legislation. Section 14, al. 2 of the 2000 Constitution of Finland
states that ""Every Finnish citizen and every foreigner permanently resident in
Finland, having attained eighteen years of age, has the right to vote in
municipal elections and municipal referendums, as provided by an Act.
Provisions on the right to otherwise participate in municipal government are
laid down by an Act."" France. (EU member) EU residents have voting and
eligibility rights for local and European elections. In France, the Socialist
Party has discussed extending the right to vote to foreigners since the early
1980s (it was the 80th proposition of the 110 Propositions for France electoral
program of 1981), but as it needed a Constitutional change it was felt that it
would have been blocked by the Senate. The alternative would have been a
referendum, but as it was generally assumed that a majority of the public
opinion was against it, it could have resulted in a defeat of the government.
On May 3, 2000, a bill was voted on by the National Assembly by the Left and 2
centrist Union for French Democracy deputies, but it was blocked by the Senate.
Polls suggest that a narrow majority of the public opinion is now favorable to
it and even Nicolas Sarkozy and a few other prominent right-wing politicians
like Philippe Séguin (candidate to the mayorship of Paris in 2001) Gilles de
Robien and Jean-Louis Borloo have stated publicly that they personally
supported it, but that they would respect the overwhelming opposition to it
within their own parties. In January 2006 left-wing senators again tried to put
the bill to allow foreigners to vote on the agenda, but the right-wing majority
again blocked it. In the late 1990s-early 2000s some symbolic local referendums
on the subject were organized either under the auspices of the Ligue des droits
de l'homme or of the municipal authorities, one of them in Saint-Denis, at the
initiative of the Communist Party mayor. The Cergy administrative court ruled
in 2006 that the referendums were not legally binding. Other communist or
socialist-led municipalities organized such referendums, including Le Blanc-
Mesnil (PCF), Bondy (PS), Stains (PCF), La Courneuve (PCF) and Aubervilliers
(PCF). Germany. (EU member) In February 1989, the state of Schleswig-Holstein
approved local voting rights for Danish, Irish, Norwegian, Dutch, Swedish, and
Swiss 5-year residents; the state of Hamburg approved local voting for 8-year
residents. Both were struck down as unconstitutional by the Federal
Constitutional Court of Germany on October 31, 1990 (Ruling 83, 37),
considering that the Basic Law, when stating in its article 28 that for
districts and municipalities "the people" must be represented by election, only
meant by "the people" the German citizens resident on the territory of that
administrative unit. Between 1995 and 1999, all states were complied to change
their legislation in order to comply with the December 19, 1994 94/80/CE EU
directive over voting and eligibility rights for EU residents for local and
district elections. In 1998 the coalition government agreement between the
social-democrats and the Greens for the first Schröder cabinet including
voting rights for all residents at the municipal and district level, but the
opposition led a harsh campaign for the February 7, 1999 regional elections in
the state of Hesse, mostly centered against both the planned reform of the
German nationality law and the perspective of noncitizen voting rights, won
these elections and so got a majority in the federal Upper House, where it
blocked any initiative on voting rights and forced the government to adopt a
less far-reaching reform of the nationality law. Greece. (EU member) EU
residents have voting and eligibility rights for local and European elections.
In 2010, these rights were extended for local elections to non-EU foreigners.
12,762 foreign residents out of a potential electorate of 266,250 actually
registered to vote for the November 2010 local elections. Grenada. (CN member)
Commonwealth citizens may vote and are eligible for parliamentary elections,
but "allegiance to a foreign State" is a criterion for ineligibility. Guyana.
(CN member) Commonwealth citizens with domicile and residence in Guyana for a
period of at least one year (same condition apply to Guyanese citizens) may
vote but the Guyanese citizenship is required for eligibility to the National
Assembly. Hong Kong. Voting is a relatively recent right in Hong Kong,
initiated only towards the end of the British colonial period (1842–1997) and
enlarged somewhat after handover. For this territory, the right to vote
accompanies a person’s permanent resident status in Hong Kong, not their
citizenship. The right of Hong Kong permanent residents to vote is guaranteed
in Article 26 of the Basic Law, where nationality is not even mentioned. And as
stipulated in Article 24, permanent residents include foreign persons who have
taken up permanent residency in Hong Kong for more than 7 years and other
persons (regardless of nationality) who have right of abode in Hong Kong only.
While voting by persons holding foreign passports has gone largely
unchallenged, there is some indication that increasing appeals to patriotism
may make non-citizen voting an issue of debate in the future. For those who are
permanent residents of the territory but not concurrently citizens of the
People's Republic of China, their permanent residency will be lost if they
leave the territory for more than 3 years Hungary. (EU member) In 1990,
permanent residents were allowed to vote in local elections. This was revised
in 2004 to limit non-citizen voting to EU nationals. Iceland. Voting and
eligibility rights were granted to Nordic Passport Union country citizens with
a 3 years residence condition for municipal elections in 1986. These rights
were extended to all foreign residents in 2002 with a 5 years residence
condition. Ireland. On April 18, 2008, Conor Lenihan, the Minister for
Integration, announced that full voting rights including for the President and
Dáil Éireann would be extended to all EU migrants. This has yet to come in to
force. Israel. In 1960, non-citizen voting rights in local elections were
granted for holders of a permanent resident card ("blue card"). Most permanent
residents, a status created by the 1952 "Entry into Israel Law", are migrants,
but other groups fall into the same category. Following the 1967 annexation of
East Jerusalem, Israel conducted a census on June 26, 1967 in the annexed
territory and granted permanent Israeli residency to those present at the time
of the census (those not present lost the right to reside in Jerusalem). They
can still vote in municipal elections and play a role in the administration of
the city. At the end of 2005, 93% of the Arab population of East Jerusalem had
permanent residency and 5% had Israeli citizenship. In the annexed Golan
Heights, fewer than 10% of the Druze are Israeli citizens, the remainder hold
Syrian citizenship and have the status of permanent residents. In 2003 the
Black Hebrews were granted permanent residency status by the Israeli
government. Italy. (EU member) EU residents have voting and eligibility rights
for municipal (and inframunicipal) and European elections. The debate about the
extension of local voting rights to non-EU residents ("extracomunitari")
resurfaces from time to time. A proposition included in the programme of the
Prodi I Cabinet in 1997 had to be withdrawn because of the opposition from the
Commission for Constitutional Affairs. Although the parties that support the
Berlusconi governments oppose this extension, Gianfranco Fini, leader of the
post-fascist National Alliance, supported it e.g. in 2004 and 2008, when he was
president of the Chamber of Deputies. There are some elective local
consultative council for foreigners, notably in Rome, and since 2005 several
municipal councils voted motions asking for the extension of voting rights to
non-EU residents. Jamaica. (CN member) Commonwealth citizens may vote and are
eligible for parliamentary elections, with a condition of residency in the
country during 12 months prior to the compilation of the register of electors
(only for British Commonwealth citizens), but "allegiance to a foreign State"
is a criterion for ineligibility. Japan. Currently the Constitution of Japan
defines voting rights as only for citizens. In 1990, some permanent residents
from Korea (see "Koreans in Japan") petitioned the Supreme Court to gain voting
rights. The Supreme Court declined in 1995, but it also declared that it is not
prohibited to do so. In addition, one of justices expressed that the foreigners
should be guaranteed the voting right at local elections (to be checked for
accuracy). During the 2009 legislative elections campaign, it appeared that the
New Komeito Party, the Japanese Communist Party and the Social Democratic Party
were clearly in favor of extending local voting rights to foreign residents,
while the Liberal Democratic Party was totally opposed to it and the Democratic
Party of Japan was divided on this matter, but rather in favor of the extension
of voting rights, so gaining the support of the Korean Residents Union in Japan
(Mindan) for many of its candidates. As of 2010, The Democratic Party is
considering making a draft law to permit this. Jersey. The right to vote in
Jersey is determined by residency, not citizenship, citizens of any state may
vote in Jersey elections provided they fulfill the other requirements for
electoral registration. A person is entitled to have his or her name included
on the electoral register for an electoral district if the person has been
ordinarily resident in Jersey for a period of at least 2 years, or ordinarily
resident in Jersey for a period of at least 6 months, as well as having been
ordinarily resident in Jersey at any time for an additional period of, or for
additional periods that total, at least 5 years. Lithuania. (EU member) In
2002, EU nationals were granted local voting rights. In order to achieve this,
an amendment to the constitution was adopted in June 2002 and an amendment of
the Law on elections to municipal councils was adopted in September 2002. A Law
on elections to the European Parliament was adopted by the parliament in
November 2003. Luxembourg. (EU member) In 2003: local voting were granted with
no nationality restrictions. Malawi. (CN member) Non-citizens who have been
ordinarily resident in Malawi for seven years may vote for parliamentary
elections, but only Malawi citizens are eligible to stand. Malta. (EU and CN
member) Since 1993, United Kingdom residents in Malta enjoy the same voting and
eligibility rights as Maltese citizens at the local and regional council
elections. A Bill to make provision for participation of EU citizens to local
elections and a Bill to make provision for holding of elections to the European
Parliament were adopted in November 2003. Mauritius. (CN member) Commonwealth
citizens may vote and are eligible for parliamentary elections, with a
condition of residence in Mauritius for not less than two years or domiciled in
the country on a prescribed date (also compulsory for Mauritius citizens), but
"allegiance to a State outside the Commonwealth" is a criterion for
ineligibility and "ability to speak and read English with a degree of
proficiency sufficient to allow for taking an active part in Assembly
proceedings" is a condition of eligibility. Morocco. On 17 December 2008, after
a Spanish-Moroccan summit, the Moroccan Prime Minister Abbas El Fassi declared
that his government was "studying" the possibility to grant voting rights for
municipal elections to foreign residents in Morocco. The new Moroccan
Constitution adopted in July 2011 includes in its article 30 this possibility:
"Foreigners enjoy the fundamental freedoms recognized to the Moroccan citizens,
according to the law. Those who reside in Morocco can take part at local
elections according to law, application of international conventions or
reciprocity practices." Namibia. (CN member) Voting and eligibility
requirements include citizenship of Namibia (by birth) or child of at least one
parent born in Namibia or residence in the country for at least 4 years prior
to the date of registration as elector. Netherlands. (EU member) In 1979 non-
citizens were allowed to vote in local elections in Rotterdam. This was
expanded nationwide in 1985 (though necessary reforms meant aliens did not vote
in local elections until 1986). Residents without Dutch nationality are not
allowed to vote in national elections, only in regional elections (i.e. city,
province) and European elections if aliens are holding a passport from an
European country. New Zealand. (CN member) National voting rights were granted
in 1853 to all British subjects who met the other qualifications (e.g.
property), to some non-citizens from 1960 to 1974, and to all permanent
residents from 1975 onwards, see History of voting in New Zealand. However,
permanent residents cannot gain election to parliament unless they hold New
Zealand citizenship. One party-list candidate in the 2002 election, Kelly Chal,
could not assume her position as a member of parliament because she did not
meet that criterion. Although the former MP Matt Robson, was an Australian
citizen at the time of his election, he was able to stand for election, because
he was registered as a voter before 1975. Norway. Voting and eligibility rights
were granted to Nordic Passport Union country citizens with a 3 years residence
condition for municipal and county elections in 1978. These rights were
extended to all foreign residents in 1983. The voters enrollment is automatic.
As a consequence of the 1983 extension, a 1990 bilateral treaty between Norway
and Spain granted voting rights in Spain for Norwegian citizens. Currently,
residing citizens of Nordic Passport Union countries may vote in local
elections on the same basis as Norwegian citizens without any length of
residence condition. [http://www.lovdata.no/all/tl-20020628-057-002.html#2-2]
Philippines. Article V Section 1 of the Philippine constitution provides that
suffrage may be exercised by all citizens of the Philippines not otherwise
disqualified by law, who are at least eighteen years of age, and who shall have
resided in the Philippines for at least one year, and in the place wherein they
propose to vote, for at least six months immediately preceding the election.
Section 40(d) of the Local Government Code disqualifies persons with dual
citizenship from standing for local elective office. Relevant articles of the
Philippine Constitution specify that only natural-born Philippine citizens may
hold elective office at the national level, but do not disqualify persons
holding multiple citizenships from standing for election to these offices.
Portugal. In 1971, Brazilian residents were granted voting and eligibility
rights in Portugal for municipal elections with a 2 years residency requirement
and 4 years for eligibility. In 1982, this provision was extended to Cape Verde
residents in the frame of reciprocity between Community of Portuguese Language
Countries. It was again extended in 1997, under a general rule of reciprocity
but with a 4 years residency requirement, to Peruvian and Uruguayan residents
with eligibility (after 5 years of residency) and to residents from Argentina,
Chile, Estonia, Israel, Norway and Venezuela without eligibility. However, in
2005 this list of countries was reduced to Some Brazilian residents "with
special status" ("cidadãos brasileiros com estatuto especial de igualdade de
direitos políticos") enjoy voting rights, but not eligibility rights, even for
parliamentary and regional elections. There is a political debate going on as
to whether voting rights should be extended to all noncitizen residents, as the
reciprocity clause excludes 50% of noncitizen residents. In May 2007, the High
Commissioner of Migrations and Ethnic Minorities publicly advocated the
abolition of the reciprocity clause and the extension of voting rights for
foreign residents to all elections, including parliamentary and presidential
elections. Saint Kitts and Nevis. (CN member) Commonwealth citizens may vote,
but are not eligible, for parliamentary elections, if born in the country
before independence; "allegiance to a foreign State" is a criterion for voting
rights disqualification. Saint Lucia. (CN member) Commonwealth citizens may
vote, but are only those born in Saint Lucia are eligible, for parliamentary
elections, if born in the country before independence; "allegiance to a foreign
State" is a criterion for ineligibility. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. (CN
member) Commonwealth citizens able to speak and read the English language may
vote and are eligible for parliamentary elections, if born in the country
before independence; "allegiance to a foreign State" is a criterion for voting
rights disqualification. Slovenia. (EU member) On May 29, 2002, the Slovenian
Parliament passed amendments to the Law on Local Elections which gave voting
rights in local elections to all foreigners with a permanent residence in
Slovenia. In addition to electing local council representatives and mayors,
foreigners with a permanent residence are also enabled to run for the position
of local councillor. The voting rights of foreigners are based on Article 43 of
the Constitution of Slovenia which states that a law may be used to determine
the cases and conditions in which foreigners may vote. The persons who are
entitled to vote and to be elected as members of the National Council (upper
house of the Slovenian Parliament) as a representative of employers, employees,
farmers, small businesses and independent professionals, and non-profit making
activities (functional interests) are those who perform a corresponding
activity or who are employed. National Council members belonging to these
interest groups may be elected by foreigners under the same conditions as the
citizens of Slovenia, i.e. that they are performing a corresponding activity or
are employed in Slovenia. However, they may not be elected as National Council
members. People with permanent residence in a constituency are entitled to vote
and to be elected as members of the National Council, representing local
interests. Slovakia. (EU member) In 2002, local voting rights were granted for
3-year residents. South Africa. (CN member) Only South African citizens may
vote in elections, whether national or local. Article 19(3) of the 1996 South
African Constitution states that ""Every adult citizen has the right - a) to
vote in elections for any legislative body established in terms of the
Constitution..."". No law provides voting rights for non-citizens. Up to 1996
article 6 of the 1993 South African Constitution stated that ""Every person who
is- (a)(i) a South African citizen; or (ii) not such a citizen but who in terms
of an Act of Parliament has been accorded the right to exercise the franchise;
(b) of or over the age of 18 years; and (c) not subject to any
disqualifications as may be prescribed by law, shall be entitled to vote in
elections of the National Assembly, a provincial legislature or a local
government and in referenda or plebiscites contemplated in this Constitution,
in accordance with and subject to the laws regulating such elections, referenda
and plebiscites"". South Korea. Revisions to voting laws in 2005 allow foreign
nationals aged 19 years and older who have lived in South Korea for more than
three years after obtaining permanent resident visas to vote in local
elections. 6,746 foreign residents were eligible to vote in the May 31, 2006
local elections. Spain. (EU member) Municipal voting rights are granted to
citizens of countries which reciprocate by granting voting rights to Spanish
citizens when reciprocity is enshrined in a bilateral treaty ratified by Spain,
i.e. since 1997 the EU member states and Norway, but already since 1989-1990
Denmark, the Netherlands, Sweden and Norway. Bilateral treaties with Argentina
(1988), Chile (1990) and Uruguay (1992) have never been enacted as voting
rights are not enshrined in a specific law in Chile, and for the two other
countries the instruments of ratification have never been exchanged, there are
also similar "friendship treaties" with Colombia and Venezuela. There is an
ongoing debate in Spain about either ratifying existing bilateral treaties or
changing the constitution in order to grant all residents voting rights without
reciprocity, but some Catalan parties are opposed to it. Sweden. (EU member)
Voting and eligibility rights were granted to all foreign residents with a 3
years residence condition for municipal and county elections in 1975. The 3
years reside condition was suppressed in 1997 for residents from EU (in
conformity with the European legislation) and the Nordic Passport Union. The
voters enrolment is automatic. Switzerland. Some voting rights have been
granted to non-citizens by subnational governments, the first being Neuchâtel
in 1849, then Jura in 1978 and several others afterwards. Because Switzerland
is a federal state with three different levels – the Confederation, the 26
cantons and their local communes – non-citizen voting rights vary greatly
depending on the individual entity. Foreigners may not cast ballots on the
national level, but they may be entitled to vote and, in some cases, to run for
office on the cantonal or communal level. Five cantons have already recognized
the right of foreigners to vote (Neuchâtel, Jura, Vaud in 2003, Fribourg in
2004, Geneva in 2005), plus three, Appenzell Ausserrhoden (1995), Graubünden
(2003) and Basel-Stadt (2005) which accord to each municipality the authority
to decide on the subject. Some referendums unsuccessfully took place in other
cantons. Trinidad and Tobago. (CN members) A Commonwealth citizen who has
resided legally in Trinidad and Tobago for a period of at least one year, and
has resided in an electoral district/constituency for a least two months, prior
to the qualifying date may vote at all levels in Trinidad and Tobago. Non-
Commonwealth Citizen who has resided legally in Trinidad and Tobago for a
period of at least five years, and has resided in an electoral district/
constituency for a least two months, prior to the qualifying date may also
vote, but are only eligible to vote in City or Borough elections within
Trinidad. They cannot vote in Parliamentary or Tobago House of Assembly
elections. For both Commonwealth and Non-Commonwealth citizens, who meet these
requirements can vote if they are over the age of 18. United Kingdom. (CN and
EU member) Since 1949, the United Kingdom, citizens of the Commonwealth
countries and of the Republic of Ireland have had full voting rights at all
levels and can be candidates, as they could before 1949 as British subjects;
they are not regarded in law as foreigners. For local, supralocal (Greater
London Authority) and regional (Scottish Parliament, National Assembly for
Wales, Northern Ireland Assembly) elections, EU citizens, enjoy the same rights
as Commonwealth citizens. Under Elected Authorities (Northern Ireland) Act
1989, local electors in Northern Ireland were either Commonwealth citizens or
citizens of the Republic of Ireland, the Representation of the People Act 2000
replaced that section by ""a Commonwealth citizen, a citizen of the Republic of
Ireland or a relevant citizen of the Union"". Ukraine. No voting rights to
foreigners. United States. More than 20 states or territories, including
colonies before the Declaration of Independence, admitted foreigners' right to
vote for all elections. As of May 2010, however, most of those foreign voting
and office holding rights have been repealed and, , no foreigner was allowed
vote at the national or state level in the US, and only a handful of local
governments allowed foreigners to vote. These few foreign voting rights at the
local level have been granted to non-citizens by state governments from 1968
onwards. Uruguay. Since 1952, 15-year residents have had national voting
rights. Venezuela. In Venezuela, the right to vote in municipal, parish
(county), and state elections extends to foreigners over the age of eighteen
who have ten years’ residency or more in the country. The provision for non-
citizen voting appears in Article 64 of the Venezuelan Constitution of 1999,
and has its constitutional roots in a 1983 Amendment to the previous
Constitution of 1961.
