Rise of nationalism in Europe Nationalism was an important factor in the
development of Europe. In the 19th century, a wave of romantic nationalism
swept the continent of Europe transforming the countries of the continent. Some
new countries, such as Germany and Italy were formed by uniting smaller states
with a common "national identity". Others, such as Romania, Greece, Poland and
Bulgaria, were formed by winning their independence. The French Revolution
paved the way for the modern nation-state. Across Europe radical intellectuals
questioned the old monarchial order and encouraged the development of a popular
nationalism committed to re-drawing the political map of the continent. By 1814
the days of multi-national empires were numbered. The French Revolution, by
destroying the traditional structures of power in France and territories
conquered by Napoleon, was the instrument for the political transformation of
Europe. Revolutionary armies carried the slogan of "liberty, equality and
brotherhood" and ideas of liberalism and national self-determinism. National
awakening also grew out of an intellectual reaction to the Enlightenment that
emphasized national identity and developed a romantic view of cultural self-
expression through nationhood. The key exponent of the modern idea of the
nation-state was the German G. W. F. Hegel. He argued that a sense of
nationality was the cement that held modern societies together in the age when
dynastic and religious allegiance was in decline. In 1815, at the end of the
Napoleonic wars, the major powers of Europe tried to restore the old dynastic
system as far as possible, ignoring the principle of nationality in favour of
"legitimism", the assertion of traditional claims to royal authority. With most
of Europe's peoples still loyal to their local province or city, nationalism
was confined to small groups of intellectuals and political radicals.
Furthermore, political repression, symbolized by the Carlsbad Decrees published
in Austria in 1819, pushed nationalist agitation underground. Timeline. 1804 -
Serbian revolution. 1815 - The Congress of Vienna. 1821-29 - Greek declaration
of national independence and revolution against the Ottoman Empire. 1830-31 -
Belgian Revolution 1830-31 - Revolution in Poland and Lithuania 1846 - Uprising
in Greater Poland 1848 - Nationalist revolts in Hungary, Italy and Germany
(including Polish revolt in Greater Poland). 1859-61 - Italy unified. 1863 -
Polish national revolt. 1866-71 - Germany unified. 1867 - Hungary granted
autonomy. 1878 - Congress of Berlin: Serbia, Romania and Montenegro granted
independence, after they won the war against the Ottoman Empire. 1908 -
Bulgaria becomes independent. The struggle for independence. A strong
resentment of what came to be regarded as foreign rule began to develop. In
Ireland, Italy, Belgium, Greece, Poland, Hungary and Norway local hostility to
alien dynastic authority started to take the form of nationalist agitation.
Nationalism came to be seen as the most effective way to create the symbols of
resistance and to unite in a common cause. First national revolution was in
Serbian (1804–1817) which created the first nation-state in Central Europe.
Success came in Greece where an eight-year war (1821–1829) against Ottoman
rule led to an independent Greek state; in 1831 Belgium obtained independence
from the Netherlands. Over the next two decades nationalism developed a more
powerful voice, spurred by nationalist writers championing the cause of
nationalist self-determination. In 1848, revolutions broke out across Europe,
sparked by a severe famine and economic crisis and mounting popular demand for
political change. In Italy Giuseppe Mazzini used the opportunity to encourage a
war for national unity. In 1861 he wrote: "No people ever die, nor stop short
upon their path, before they have achieved the ultimate aim of their existence,
before having completed and fulfilled their mission. A people destined to
achieve great things for the welfare of humanity must on day or other be
constituted a nation". In Hungary, Lajos Kossuth led a national revolt against
Austrian rule; in Transylvania, Avram Iancu (also known as "Craisorul
Muntilor", which means "The Prince of the Mountains") led the Romanian revolt
against the Hungarian rule; in the German Confederation a National Assembly was
elected at Frankfurt and debated the creation of a German nation. None of the
nationalist revolts in 1848 were successful, any more than the two attempts to
win Polish independence from Russian rule in 1831 and 1846 had been.
Conservative forces proved too strong, while the majority of the populations
little understood the meaning of national struggle. But the 1848 crisis had
given nationalism its first full public airing, and in the thirty years that
followed no fewer than seven new national states were created in Europe. This
was partly the result of the recognition by conservative forces that the old
order could not continue in its existing form. Conservative reformers such as
Cavour and Bismarck made common cause with liberal political modernizers to
create a consensus for the creation of conservative nation-states in Italy and
Germany. In the Habsburg empire a compromise was reached with Hungarian
nationalists in 1867 granting them a virtually independent state. In the
Balkans the Serbian example had inspired other national awakenings. Native
history and culture were rediscovered and appropriated for the national
struggle. Following a conflict between Russia and Turkey, the Great Powers met
at Berlin in 1878 and granted independence to Romania, Serbia and Montenegro
and a limited autonomy to Bulgaria. Nationalism's growth and export. The
invention of a symbolic national identity became the concern of racial, ethnic
or linguistic groups throughout Europe as they struggled to come to terms with
the rise of mass politics, the decline of the traditional social elites,
popular discrimination and xenophobia. Within the Habsburg empire the different
peoples developed a more mass-based, violent and exclusive form of nationalism.
This developed even among the Germans and Magyars, who actually benefited from
the power-structure of the empire. On the European periphery, especially in
Ireland and Norway, campaigns for national independence became more strident.
In 1905 Norway won independence from Sweden, but attempts to grant Ireland the
kind of autonomy enjoyed by Hungary foundered on the national divisions on the
island between the Catholic and Protestant populations. The Polish attempts to
win independence from Russia had previously proved to be unsuccessful, with
Poland being the only country in Europe whose autonomy was gradually limited
rather than expanded throughout the 19th century, as a punishment for the
failed uprisings; in 1831 Poland lost its status as a formally independent
state and was merged into Russia as a real union country and in 1867 she became
nothing more than just another Russian province. Faced with internal and
external resistance to assimilation, as well as increased xenophobic anti-
Semitism, radical demands began to develop among the stateless Jewish
population of eastern and central Europe for their own national home and
refuge. In 1897, inspired by the Hungarian-born Jewish nationalist Theodor
Herzl, the First Zionist Congress was held in Basle, and declared their
national 'home' should be in Palestine. By the end of the period, the ideals of
European nationalism had been exported worldwide and were now beginning to
develop, and both compete and threaten the empires ruled by colonial European
nation-states.
