Road pricing Road pricing (also road user charges) are direct charges levied
for the use of roads, including road tolls, distance or time based fees,
congestion charges and charges designed to discourage use of certain classes of
vehicle, fuel sources or more polluting vehicles. These charges may be used
primarily for revenue generation, usually for road infrastructure financing, or
as a transportation demand management tool to reduce peak hour travel and the
associated traffic congestion or other social and environmental negative
externalities associated with road travel such as air pollution, greenhouse gas
emissions, visual intrusion, noise and road accidents. In most countries toll
roads, toll bridges and toll tunnels are often used primarily for revenue
generation to repay for long-term debt issued to finance the toll facility, or
to finance capacity expansion, operations and maintenance of the facility
itself, or simply as general tax funds. Road congestion pricing for entering an
urban area, or pollution charges levied vehicles with higher tailpipe emissions
are typical schemes implemented to price externalities. The application of
congestion charges is currently limited to a small number of cities and urban
roads, and the notable schemes include the Electronic Road Pricing in
Singapore, the London congestion charge, the Stockholm congestion tax, the
Milan Area C, and high-occupancy toll lanes in the United States. Examples of
pollution pricing schemes include the London low emission zone and the
discontinued Ecopass in Milan. Mileage based usage fees (MBUF) or distance
based charging has been implemented for heavy vehicles based on truck weight
and distance traveled in New Zealand (called RUC), Switzerland (LSVA), Germany
(LKW-Maut), Austria (Go-Maut), Czech Republic, Slovakia, Poland, and in four
U.S. states: Oregon, New York, Kentucky and New Mexico. Many recent road
pricing schemes have proved controversial with a number of high profile schemes
in the U.S. and the UK being cancelled, delayed or scaled back in response to
opposition and protest. Critics maintain that congestion pricing is not
equitable, places an economic burden on neighboring communities, has a negative
effect on retail businesses and on economic activity in general, and is just
another tax. A 2006 survey of economic literature on the subject, however,
finds that most economists agree that some form of road pricing to reduce
congestion is economically viable, although there is disagreement on what form
road pricing should take. Economists disagree over how to set tolls, how to
cover common costs, what to do with any excess revenues, whether and how
“losers” from tolling previously free roads should be compensated, and
whether to privatize highways. Terminology. Road pricing is a general term
which may be used for any system where the driver pays directly for use of a
particular roadway or road network in a particular city, region or nation. Road
pricing also includes congestion charging, which are charges levied on
qualifying road users to reduce peak demand, and thereby reduce traffic
congestion and also to place a charge on road users for other negative
externalities, including traffic accidents, noise, air pollution, and
greenhouse gas emissions. History. The first published reference to 'road
pricing' was possibly in 1949 when the RAND Corporation proposed "use of direct
road pricing to make freight journeys more expensive on congested routes or to
influence the time of day at which freight traffic operates". Nobel-laureate
William Vickrey then built on the ideas of the economist Arthur Pigou,
outlining a theoretical case for road pricing in a major work on the subject of
1955 proposing in 1959 that drivers should be charged by electronic means for
use of busy urban roads. Arthur Pigou had previously developed the concept of
economic externalities in a publication of 1920 in which he proposed that what
is now referred to as a Pigouvian tax equal to the negative externality should
be used to bring the outcome within a market economy back to economic
efficiency. In 1963 Vickery published a paper 'Pricing in urban and suburban
transport’ in the American Economic Review and Gabriel Joseph Roth, John
Michael Thomson of the Department of Applied Economics at the University of
Cambridge published a short paper titled "Road pricing, a cure for
congestion?". The Smeed Report, 'Road Pricing: The Economic and Technical
Possibilities' which had been commissioned in 1962 by the United Kingdom
Ministry of Transport was published in 1964. Road pricing was then developed by
Maurice Allais and Gabriel Roth in a paper titled "The Economics of Road User
Charges" published by the World Bank in 1968. The first successful
implementation of a congestion charge was with the Singapore Area Licensing
Scheme in 1976. The Electronic Road Pricing (Hong Kong) scheme operated as a
trial between 1983 and 1985 but was not continued permanently due to public
opposition. A number of road tolling schemes were then introduced in Norway
between 1986 and 1991 in Bergen, Oslo and the Trondheim Toll Scheme. It was
noticed that the Oslo scheme had the unintended effect of reducing traffic by
around 5%. The Singapore scheme was expanded in 1995 and converted to use a new
electronic tolling system in 1998 and renamed Electronic Road Pricing. The
first use of a road toll for access by low-occupancy vehicles to high-occupancy
vehicle lane was introduced in the U.S. on California State Route 91 in 1995.
Since 2000 and other schemes have been introduced although notable the New York
congestion pricing and a number of UK proposals were not progressed due to
public opposition. Example schemes. Asia. Australia. In January 2009, variable
tolls were implemented at Sydney Harbour Bridge, two weeks after upgrading to
100% free-flow electronic toll collection. The highest fees are charged during
the morning and afternoon peak periods; a toll 25% lower applies for the
shoulder periods; and a toll lower than the previously existing is charged at
nights, weekends, and public holidays. This is Australia's first road
congestion pricing scheme, and has had only a very minor effect on traffic
levels, reducing them by 0.19% China. Hong Kong's Electronic Road Pricing
system operated between 1983 and 1985 with positive results. Public opposition
stalled its permanent implementation. Proposals were however raised again in
2012. Main roadways and highways in Shanghai are tolled, and an assessment was
completed to evaluate implementation of congestion pricing for vehicles
entering the central business district. The city also restrains car use,
ownership and there are restrictions on getting a driver's license; since 1998,
the number of new car registrations is limited to 50,000 vehicles a year and
car registrations are sold by public auction, with prices reaching up to
US$5,000 in 2006. Parking is also limited. Congestion based pricing for Beijing
was recommended by the World Bank in 2010 and local officials announced plans
to introduce a scheme in September 2011 although no details about the cost or
the charge zone have been provided. Currently the city is dealing with traffic
congestion and air pollution through a road space rationing scheme implemented
since the 2008 Summer Olympics. In early 2010 the city Guangzhou, Guangdong
province, opened a public discussion on whether to introduce congestion
charges. An online survey conducted by two local news outlets found that 84.4%
of respondents opposed the charges. The City of Nanjing is also considering the
implementation of congestion pricing. Singapore. The world's first congestion
pricing scheme was introduced in Singapore's core central business district in
1975 as the Singapore Area Licensing Scheme. It was extended in 1995 and
converted to the 100% free-flowing Electronic Road Pricing (Singapore) in
September 1998. Variable pricing based on congestion levels were introduced
during 2007. It is one of a number of elements in their Transportation Demand
Management , which also includes high annual road tax, custom duties and
vehicle registration fees for new vehicles, a quota system for new vehicles and
heavy investment in public transportation. Singapore has one of the highest per
capita incomes in Asia by fewer than 30% of Singaporean households owns cars.
Europe. Austria. A distance based charging scheme called Go-Maut was
implemented in Austria for all vehicles over 3.5 tonnes on motorways in 2004.
Germany. The LKW-MAUT distance based charging scheme large goods vehicles in
Germany began operation on 1 January 2005 after a two year delay with prices
varying depending on emission levels and the number of axles. The scheme which
combining satellite technology with other technologies and is operated by Toll
Collect suffered delays before implementation. Italy. Rome converted a
residents' pass system for the core of the city to a road pricing system in
2001 and Genoa started a trial system in 2003. The Milan "Ecopass" system began
operation in early 2008 with an objective to reduce air pollution from
vehicles. It was extended several times before being replaced by Area C, a
conventional congestion pricing scheme covering the same geographic area in
January 2012 as an 18-month pilot. Electric vehicles, public utilities'
vehicles, police and emergency vehicles, buses and taxis are exempted from the
charge. Hybrid electric and bi-fuel natural gas vehicles (CNG and LPG) will be
exempted until January 1, 2013. Malta. The automated 'Controlled Vehicular
Access' (CVA) system was launched in Malta's capital city of Valletta on May 1,
2007. The number of vehicles entering the city reduced from 10,000 to 7,900;
there has also been a 60% drop in car stays by non-residents of more than eight
hours with a marked increase of 34% in non-residential cars visiting the city
for an hour or less. Norway. Norway implemented electronic urban tolling on the
main road corridors into Bergen in 1986), Oslo (1990) and then the Trondheim
Toll Scheme the following year. The Bergen scheme operated as a cordon on all
entry points to the central area of the city. The Oslo scheme was initially
created as a conventional road toll for revenue generation reasons, but had the
unintended effect of reducing traffic by around 5%. Charges vary by time of the
day. The legal basis for introducing congestion charging fee was approved by
Parliament in 2001 and came into force in October 2011. Sweden. The Stockholm
congestion tax covering Stockholm City Centre was trialed for seven month trial
during 2006 and has been operational on a permanent basis since August 1, 2007;
all the entrances and exits of this area have unmanned control points operating
with automatic number plate recognition and most vehicles pay a fixed fee
during peak hours. United Kingdom. The Smeed Report recommended the
implementation of congestion charging in 1964 and road pricing for London was
considered by the Greater London Council in 1973 but was not progressed. The
Durham City congestion charge was introduced in 2002 and the London congestion
charge in 2003. In June 2005, Transport Secretary Alistair Darling announced
the a proposal for a national scheme in which every vehicle would be fitted
with a satellite receiver which would calculate charges, with prices (including
fuel duty) ranging from 2p per mile on uncongested roads to £1.34 on the most
congested roads at peak times. The scheme was dropped after an online petition
against proposals gained over 1.8 million signatures. A number of local schemes
were then proposed and rejected during 2007-2008, including the Manchester
congestion charge Planned emissions based charges in London cancelled following
the 2008 Mayoral election. A 'Western Extension' was added to the London scheme
in 2007 but then removed in January 2011. The London low emission zone was
introduced in stages between 2008 and 2012 with an aim of reducing the
pollution emissions of diesel-powered commercial vehicles in London. UK wide
road pricing for Large goods vehicles, which was first proposed in 2000 before
being dropped and then revived in 2012. Middle east. Dubai. The Salik (road
toll) system in Dubai, United Arab Emirates was introduced by the Roads and
Transport Authority in 2007 and extended in 2008. North America. New York. In
March 2001, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey implemented a
discount during off-peak hours for those vehicles paying tolls for several
tunnels and bridges connecting New York City and New Jersey using the
electronic EZ Pass. Since March 2008, qualified low-emission automobiles could
get a 50% discount during off-peak hours. In April 2007 the New York City Mayor
Michael Bloomberg proposed a contentious congestion charge on cars using most
streets in the central business district (southern half of Manhattan) as part
of the broader PlaNYC 2030. The plan received broad support from a coalition of
civic, business, environmental, labor, community and public health
organizations and the City Council voted for the measure but also received
significant opposition. The New York Legislature declined to vote on it in in
April 2008 saying that ""...the opposition was so overwhelming...that he would
not hold an open vote of the full Assembly,"". San Francisco. In 2006, San
Francisco authorities began a feasibility study to evaluate congestion pricing
in the city. The initial charging scenarios considered were presented in public
meetings held in December 2008 and the final draft proposal were discussed by
the San Francisco Board of Supervisors (SFBS) in December 2010 which
recommended implementation of a six-month to one-year trial in 2015.
Separately, in July 2010 congestion tolls were implemented at the San
Francisco-Oakland Bay Bridge. Other metropolitan areas. In August 2007, the
United States Department of Transportation selected five metropolitan areas to
initiate congestion pricing demonstration projects under the Urban Partnerships
Congestion Initiative, for US$ 1 billion of federal funding. The five projects
under this initiative are; Golden Gate Bridge in San Francisco, State Route 520
serving downtown Seattle and communities to its east, Interstate 95 between
Miami and Ft. Lauderdale, Interstate 35W serving downtown Minneapolis, and a
variable rate parking meter system in Chicago, which replaced New York City
after it left the program in 2008. High occupancy toll (HOT) lanes. The most
common application of congestion pricing policies in the U.S. urban
transportation context is to toll a single facility (highway or bridge). Tolls
for the use of High-occupancy vehicle lanes by low or single-occupancy vehicles
were first implemented on California's private toll 91 Express Lanes, in Orange
County in 1995, followed in 1996 by Interstate 15 in San Diego. South America.
Chile. Congestion pricing has also been implemented in urban freeways. Between
2004 and 2005, Santiago de Chile implemented the first 100% non-stop urban toll
for concessioned freeways passing through a downtown area, charging by the
distance traveled. Congestion pricing is used since 2007 during rush hours in
order to maintain reasonable speeds within the city's core with the aim of
keeping a minimum level of service for their customers.
