Robert Stewart, Viscount Castlereagh Robert Stewart, 2nd Marquess of
Londonderry, KG, GCH, PC, PC (Ire) (18 June 1769 – 12 August 1822), usually
known as Lord Castlereagh ( ), was an Irish and British statesman. As British
Foreign Secretary, from 1812 he was central to the management of the coalition
that defeated Napoléon and was the principal British diplomat at the Congress
of Vienna. Castlereagh was also leader of the British House of Commons in the
Liverpool government from 1812 until his death by suicide in August 1822. Early
in his career, as Chief Secretary for Ireland, he was involved in putting down
the Irish Rebellion of 1798 and was instrumental in securing the passage of the
controversial Irish Act of Union of 1800. Title. Robert Stewart acquired the
courtesy title Viscount Castlereagh in 1796 when his father was created Earl of
Londonderry in the Irish peerage. Upon his father's death in 1821, he succeeded
as 2nd Marquess of Londonderry, a title to which his father had been raised in
1816. His younger half-brother, the soldier, politician and diplomat Charles
Stewart (later Vane) succeeded him as 3rd Marquess of Londonderry. Family.
Robert Stewart was born in Henry Street, Dublin, Ireland, in 1769 the son of
Robert Stewart (1739–1821) of Newtownards and Comber in County Down, with
properties in Counties Donegal and Londonderry. The family seat was Mount
Stewart, County Down. The elder Stewart was an Irish politician and prominent
Ulster landowner He was created Baron Londonderry in 1789, Viscount Castlereagh
in 1795, and Earl of Londonderry in 1796 by King George III. In 1771 he was
elected in the Whig interest to the Irish House of Commons, where he was a
supporter of Lord Charlemont and his allies who called for greater independence
from Britain. From the Act of Union of 1800, however, he sat in the British
House of Lords as an Irish representative peer. In 1816 he was created Marquess
of Londonderry by the Prince Regent. Stewart's mother, who died in childbirth
when he was a year old, was Lady Sarah Frances Seymour, daughter of Francis
Seymour-Conway, 1st Marquess of Hertford (a former British Ambassador to France
(1764–65) and Lord Lieutenant of Ireland (1765–66)) and Isabella Fitzroy,
daughter of Charles FitzRoy, 2nd Duke of Grafton. His father remarried five
years later to Frances Pratt, daughter of Charles Pratt, 1st Earl Camden
(1714–94), a leading English jurist and prominent political supporter of both
the 1st Earl of Chatham and his son, William Pitt the Younger. Through the
elder Stewart's marriages, he linked his family with the upper ranks of English
nobility and political elites. The Camden connection was to be especially
important for the political careers of both him and his elder son. By Frances
Pratt, Stewart's father had three children who survived to adulthood, including
Stewart's half-brother, Charles William Stewart (later Vane), Baron Stewart of
Stewart's Court and Ballylawn in County Donegal (1814) and 3rd Marquess of
Londonderry (1822). In 1794, Stewart married Amelia (Emily) Hobart a daughter
of John Hobart, 2nd Earl of Buckinghamshire, a former British Ambassador to
Russia (1762–65) and Lord Lieutenant of Ireland (1776–80). Her mother,
Caroline Conolly, was the granddaughter of William Conolly, Speaker of the
Irish House of Commons in the early 18th century and one of the wealthiest
landowners in Ireland. Caroline's brother, Thomas Conolly, was married to
Louisa Lennox, sister of Emily FitzGerald, Duchess of Leinster, whose son and
Emily's cousin-by-marriage, the aristocratic rebel Lord Edward FitzGerald, was
a leader of the United Irishmen and one of their martyrs in the early stages of
the Irish Rebellion of 1798. Emily Stewart was well known as a hostess for her
husband in both Ireland and London and during some of his most important
diplomatic missions. In later years she was a leader of Regency London high
society as one of the Lady Patronesses of Almack's. She is noted in
contemporary accounts for her attractiveness, volubility and eccentricities. By
all accounts, the two remained devoted to each other to the end, but they had
no children. The couple did, however, care for the young Frederick Stewart,
while his father, Stewart's half-brother, Charles, was serving in the army.
Early life and career. Stewart had recurring health problems throughout his
childhood, and his family elected to send him to The Royal School, Armagh
rather than to England for his secondary education. At the encouragement of
Earl Camden, who took a great interest in him and treated him as a grandson by
blood, he later attended St. John's College, Cambridge (1786–87), where he
applied himself with greater diligence than expected from an aristocrat and
obtained first class in his last examinations. He left Cambridge due to an
extended illness, and after returning to Ireland did not pursue further formal
education. In 1790, Stewart was elected as a Member of the Irish Parliament for
Down in one of the most expensive elections in Irish history. Though for a time
he was associated with the Northern Whig Club, he entered the Irish House of
Commons as an Independent. He ran on a platform supporting Whig principles of
electoral reform and opposing the Irish policies of the British Government. But
even from the outset of his career, he was a personal supporter of the Prime
Minister, William Pitt. Stewart was a lifelong advocate of Catholic
concessions, though his position on the specific issue of Catholic emancipation
varied depending on his assessment of the potential repercussions on other
policy priorities. When war with France forced Government attention on defense
of Ireland, the Irish Volunteers, a potential source of disaffection, were
disbanded by Dublin Castle, and a reorganised Militia was created in 1793.
Stewart enrolled as an officer, a matter of course for a young Protestant
aristocrat, and served as Lieutenant Colonel under the command of his wife's
uncle, Thomas Conolly. Between Stewart's attendance to his militia duties, his
pursuit of cultural, family and political interests in London, two trips to the
Continent (in 1791, when he visited revolutionary Paris, and 1792), and the
courtship of his wife whom he married in 1794, his life during this period was
not centered on the activities of the Irish House of Commons, where he was
listened to with respect but where he was not yet an important player. He was
also beginning to disappoint some of his more radical original supporters in
his constituency. As the French Revolution grew more bloody and Ireland more
rebellious, Stewart increasingly worried about Ireland's future if the threats
from France succeeded in breaking Ireland's links to Britain. He became further
inclined to support not only Pitt personally but the British Government, even
when he did not approve of a specific line taken in Irish policy. In 1794,
partly as a result of the promotion of Stewart's interests by his Camden
connections, he was offered the Government-controlled seat of Tregony in
Cornwall, where he was elected to the British House of Commons on a similar
platform of reform principles and support for Pitt, on whose side he sat in
Westminster. In 1796, he transferred to a seat for the Suffolk constituency of
Orford, which was in the interest of his mother's family, the Seymour-Conways
(Marquess of Hertford). Chief Secretary for Ireland. In 1795, Pitt replaced the
popular Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, Lord Fitzwilliam, with Stewart's uncle, the
2nd Earl Camden. Camden's arrival in Dublin was greeted with riots, and that
year Stewart crossed the floor to join the supporters of the British
Government. Stewart became an essential adviser to the inexperienced and
unpopular Lord Lieutenant, who was Stewart's senior by only ten years. In 1796,
when the French invasion of Ireland failed at Bantry Bay due to bad weather and
not to Ireland's military preparations or the British Navy, Castlereagh as a
leader of the Militia saw first hand how ripe Ireland was for breaking from
Britain and becoming another French satellite. Despairing of obtaining timely
military support from Britain if Ireland were again threatened with invasion,
for the next several years, he was increasingly involved in measures against
those promoting rebellion, but his initial principles of reform and
emancipation continued to hold a place in his political thought. In 1797,
Castlereagh was at last appointed to office, as Keeper of the King's Signet for
Ireland. As martial law was declared in the face of growing turmoil, he was
made both a Lord of the Treasury and a Member of the Privy Council of Ireland
(1797–1800). At the urging of Camden, Castlereagh assumed many of the onerous
duties of the often-absent Chief Secretary for Ireland who was responsible for
day-to-day administration and asserting the influence of Dublin Castle in the
House of Commons. In this capacity, and after March 1798 as Acting Chief
Secretary, Castlereagh played a key role in crushing the Irish Rebellion of
1798, offering clemency to commoners who had supported the rebellion, and
focusing instead on pursuing rebel leaders. In 1799, in furtherance of both his
own political vision and Pitt's policies, Castlereagh began lobbying in the
Irish and British Parliaments for an official union between the two, convinced
that it was the best way to soothe the long-standing divides in Ireland,
insulate Ireland from further radical disaffection, and protect Britain from
French military threats via Ireland. His first attempt, at the opening of the
Irish session of 1799, met with failure during long, heated debates. A year of
further intense preparation followed, with an impressive display of
Machiavellian tactics that included the common Irish practice of bribery
through peerages, honours and money, but bribery on a truly uncommon scale. In
the summer of 1800, Castlereagh together with the Lord Lieutenant, Marquess
Cornwallis, finally succeeded in steering the Irish Act of Union through both
Parliaments. During the campaign for the Act of Union, both Castlereagh and
Cornwallis had, in good faith, forwarded informal assurances they had received
from Pitt's Cabinet to the Irish Catholics that they would be allowed to sit in
Parliament. Both Castlereagh and Cornwallis knew Catholic emancipation would be
critical if their objectives for Union were to be realised. Emancipation was,
however, opposed by much of the British establishment, including George III,
who was convinced that it would violate his royal oath as protector of the
Protestant faith. Pitt tried to follow through on his commitment, but when it
came to light that the King had approached Henry Addington, an opponent of
Catholic emancipation, about becoming Prime Minister to replace the pro-
emancipation Pitt, both Castlereagh and Pitt resigned in protest. Still,
Castlereagh would long be held personally responsible by many Catholics in
Ireland for the apparent breach of promise and Government's betrayal of their
interests. In Dublin, he was a member of the Kildare Street Club. He was
elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1802. At Westminster and in
Government. When the newly united Parliament of the United Kingdom met in 1801,
Castlereagh took his seat in the House of Commons from his Down constituency.
By 1802, tensions between Tories supporting emancipation and those opposing had
relaxed, and Addington had obtained his desired cessation of hostilities with
France (the Peace of Amiens). At a shift in the composition of Addington's
Government, Castlereagh accepted the offer to enter the Cabinet as President of
the Board of Control, where he mediated bitter disputes between the Governor-
General of India, Richard Wellsley, and the Directors of the East India
Company, smoothing quarrels while generally supporting Lord Wellesley's
policies. After the renewal of the war against Napoleon, at the urging of
Castlereagh and other long-time supporters, in 1804 Pitt returned as Prime
Minister, and Castlereagh was promoted to Secretary of State for War and the
Colonies. As the only other member of Pitt's Government in the House of
Commons, Castlereagh became Pitt's political deputy, taking on ever more
burdens as Pitt's health continued to decline. After Pitt's death in 1806,
Castlereagh resigned amid the chaos of the Ministry of All the Talents. When
that Government collapsed, Castlereagh again became Secretary of State for War
and the Colonies in 1807, this time in the ministry of the Duke of Portland.
The duel with Canning. As minister for War, he became involved in disputes with
Foreign Secretary George Canning over the Walcheren Expedition and its failure.
Canning saw it as a diversion of troops from the Peninsular War based on a
hopeless plan. However, Castlereagh had the support of Lord Wellesley's younger
brother General Arthur Wellesley (future Duke of Wellington), and evidence
later surfaced that Canning himself had interfered with the plan, selecting the
Earl of Chatham to command the expedition. The Portland government became
increasingly paralysed by disputes between the two men. Portland was in
deteriorating health and gave no lead, until Canning threatened resignation
unless Castlereagh was removed and replaced by Lord Wellesley. Wellesley
himself was neither complicit with nor even aware of the arrangement, but
Portland secretly agreed to make this change when it became possible.
Castlereagh discovered the deal in September 1809 and demanded redress. He
challenged Canning to a duel, which Canning accepted. Canning had never before
fired a pistol. The duel was fought on 21 September 1809 on Putney Heath.
Canning missed but Castlereagh wounded his opponent in the thigh. There was
much outrage that two cabinet ministers had resorted to such a method, and they
both felt compelled to resign from the government. Six months later, Canning
published a full account of his actions in the affair, and many who had
initially rallied to him became convinced Castlereagh had been betrayed by his
cabinet colleague. Diplomatic career. Three years later, in 1812, Castlereagh
returned to the government, this time as Foreign Secretary, a role in which he
served for the next ten years. He also became leader of the House of Commons in
the wake of Spencer Perceval's assassination in 1812. In his role of Foreign
Secretary he was instrumental in negotiating what has become known as the
quadruple alliance between the United Kingdom, Austria, Russia, and Prussia at
Chaumont in March 1814, in the negotiation of the Treaty of Paris that brought
peace with France, and at the Congress of Vienna. At the Congress of Vienna,
Castlereagh designed and proposed a form of collective and collaborative
security for Europe, then called a Congress system. In the Congress system, the
main signatory powers met periodically (every two years or so) and collectively
managed European affairs. This system was successfully used to resolve the
Polish-Saxon crisis at Vienna and the question of Greek independence at
Laibach. The following ten years saw five European Congresses where disputes
were resolved with a diminishing degree of effectiveness. Finally, by 1822, the
whole system had collapsed because of the irreconcilable differences of opinion
among Britain, Austria, and Russia, and because of the lack of support for the
Congress system in British public opinion. The Holy Alliance, which Castlereagh
opposed, lingered for some time, however, and even had effects on the
international stage as late as the Crimean war. The order created by the
Congress of Vienna was also more successful than Congresses themselves,
preventing major European land wars until the First World War a century later.
Scholars and historians have seen the Congress system as a forerunner of the
modern, arguably more effective collective security, international unity, and
cooperative agreements of NATO, the EU, the League of Nations, and the United
Nations. In the years 1812 to 1822, Castlereagh continued to competently manage
Britain's foreign policy, generally pursuing a policy of continental engagement
uncharacteristic of British foreign policy in the nineteenth century.
Castlereagh was not known to be an effective public speaker and his diplomatic
presentation style was at times abstruse. He nonetheless developed a reputation
for integrity, consistency, and goodwill, which was perhaps unmatched by any
diplomat of that era. His views on foreign policy were, unfortunately for him,
ahead of his time. Decline and death. After the death of his father in 1821,
Castlereagh became the 2nd Marquess of Londonderry. As a non-representative
Irish peer Londonderry was eligible to sit in the House of Commons. In 1822, he
began to suffer from a form of paranoia or a nervous breakdown, possibly as a
result of an attack of gout combined with the stress of public criticism. He
was also severely overworked with both his responsibilities in leading the
government in the House and the never-ending diplomacy required to manage
conflicts among the other major powers. At the time, he said "My mind, is, as
it were, gone." Londonderry returned to his country seat at Loring Hall in
Water Lane, North Cray, Kent on the advice of his doctor. On 9 August 1822 he
had an audience with King George IV in which he appeared distracted and
mentally disturbed. Among other surprising remarks he revealed to the King that
he thought he was being blackmailed for homosexuality. On 12 August, although
his wife had succeeded in removing razors from his possession and even though
his doctor was in attendance, Castlereagh managed to find a pen knife with
which he committed suicide by cutting his own throat. An inquest concluded that
the act had been committed while insane, avoiding the harsh strictures of a
"felo de se" verdict. The verdict allowed Lady Londonderry to see her husband
buried with honour in Westminster Abbey near his mentor, William Pitt. Some
radicals, notably William Cobbett, claimed a "cover-up" within the government
and viewed the verdict and Castlereagh's public funeral as a damning indictment
of the elitism and privilege of the unreformed electoral system. His funeral on
20 August was greeted with jeering and insults along the processional route,
although not to the level of unanimity projected in the radical press. A
funeral monument was not erected until 1850 by his half-brother and successor,
Charles Stewart Vane, 3rd Marquess of Londonderry. An English Heritage blue
plaque is displayed at the entrance to the listed building Loring Hall, now a
care facility for those with learning disabilities, in commemoration of
Castlereagh, who occupied the property from 1811 until his death. Ghost story.
Robert Stewart was said to have seen a ghost in the barracks at Ballyshannon
one night. He claimed that the face of a boy came out of the fireplace and
approached him. When he stepped forward toward it, it receded and then faded
away. Castlereagh supposedly told this story to Sir Walter Scott, and called
the apparition "The Radiant Boy."
