Robert A. Dahl Robert Alan Dahl (born 17 December 1915, Inwood, Iowa), is the
Sterling Professor emeritus of political science at Yale University, where he
earned his Ph.D. in political science in 1940. He is past president of the
American Political Science Association and an honorary member of Manuscript
Society. He received an honorary Doctor of Laws (LL.D.) degree from Harvard
University in 1998. Dahl has often been described as "the Dean" of American
political scientists. Writings. In the late 1950s and early 1960s, he was
involved in a dispute with C. Wright Mills over the nature of politics in the
United States. Mills held that America's governments are in the grasp of a
unitary and demographically narrow power elite. Dahl responded that there are
many different elites involved, who have to work both in contention and in
compromise with one another. If this is not democracy in a populist sense, Dahl
contended, it is at least polyarchy (or pluralism). In perhaps his best known
work, "Who Governs?" (1961), he examines the power structures (both formal and
informal) in the city of New Haven, Connecticut, as a case study, and finds
that it supports this view. From the late 1960s onwards, his conclusions were
challenged by scholars such as G. William Domhoff and Charles E. Lindblom (a
friend and colleague of Dahl). In more recent years, Dahl's writings have taken
on a more pessimistic tone. In "How Democratic Is the American Constitution?"
(2001) he argued that the constitution is much less democratic than it ought to
be given that its authors were operating from a position of "profound
ignorance" about the future. However, he adds that there is little or nothing
that can be done about this "short of some constitutional breakdown, which I
neither foresee nor, certainly, wish for." Influence terms. One of Robert
Dahl’s many contributions is his explication of the varieties of power, which
he defines as “A” getting “B” to do what “A” wants. Dahl prefers
the more neutral “influence terms,” (Michael G. Roskin) which he arrayed on
a scale from best to worst: Thus, we can tell which governments are best; the
ones that use influence at the higher end of the scale. The worst use the
unpleasant forms of influence at the lower end. Democracy and polyarchies.
Instead, he calls politically advanced countries "polyarchies". Polyarchies
have elected officials, free and fair elections, inclusive suffrage, rights to
run for office, freedom of expression, alternative information and
associational autonomy. Those institutions are a major advance in that they
create multiple centers of political power. Prizes. Dahl was awarded the Johan
Skytte Prize in Political Science in 1995.
