Robin Hood effect The Robin Hood effect is an economic occurrence where income
is redistributed so that economic inequality is reduced. The effect is named
after Robin Hood, said to have stolen from the rich to give to the poor. Causes
of a Robin Hood effect. A Robin Hood effect can be caused by a large number of
different policies or economic decisions, not all of which are specifically
aimed at reducing inequality. This article lists only some of these. Natural
national development. Simon Kuznets argued that one major factor behind levels
of economic inequality is the stage of economic development of a country.
Kuznets described a curve-like relationship between level of income and
inequality, as shown. That theory prescribes that countries with very low
levels of development will have relatively equal distributions of wealth. As a
country develops, it necessarily acquires more capital, and the owners of this
capital will then have more wealth and income, which introduces inequality.
However, eventually various possible redistribution mechanisms such as trickle
down effects and social welfare programs will lead to a Robin Hood effect, with
wealth redistributed to the poor. Therefore, more developed countries move back
to lower levels of inequality. Non-proportional income tax. Many countries have
an income tax system where the first part of a worker's salary is taxed very
little or not at all, while those on higher salaries must pay a higher tax rate
on earnings over a certain threshold, known as progressive taxation. This has
the effect of the better-off population paying a higher proportion of their
salary in tax, effectively subsidising the less-well off, leading to a Robin
Hood effect. Specifically, a progressive tax is a tax by which the tax rate
increases as the taxable base amount increases. "Progressive" describes a
distribution effect on income or expenditure, referring to the way the rate
progresses from low to high, where the average tax rate is less than the
marginal tax rate. It can be applied to individual taxes or to a tax system as
a whole; a year, multi-year, or lifetime. Progressive taxes attempt to reduce
the tax incidence of people with a lower , as they shift the incidence
increasingly to those with a higher ability-to-pay. Cross-subsidisation of
mobile telephony. In many developing countries, mobile communications networks
tend to experience a large network externality, which regulators and operators
seek to correct by subsiding subscriptions through increased prices for call
termination. That then allows the less-well off in that country to gain access
to communications services, often for free (on a prepay tariff). The additional
cost is then levied on subscribers who make calls to these new subscribers; the
call originators tend to be better-off. Therefore, despite there being no
direct transfer of money, there is a strong Robin Hood effect, with the better-
off subsidising the less well-off.
