Roosevelt Institute Campus Network The Roosevelt Institute Campus Network,
formerly the Roosevelt Institution, is the first student-run policy
organization in the United States. It is a part of the Franklin and Eleanor
Roosevelt Institute, an organization with offices in New York, NY, Washington,
DC, and Hyde Park, NY, focused on carrying forward through new leaders and
ideas the values and spirit that Franklin and Eleanor brought to the last
century. Roosevelt currently has 8,500 active members and over 80 established
chapters both in the United States and abroad. Individual chapters on college
campuses conduct research and write policy regarding various public issues. It
is the first student-run policy research group or "think tank" in the United
States. Roosevelt was founded at Stanford University and Yale University
following the 2004 U.S. Presidential Election. Its name is a counterpoint to
the conservative Hoover Institution at Stanford. History. The Roosevelt
Institution, now The Roosevelt Institute Campus Network, was founded in 2004 by
disillusioned young progressives seeking a stronger voice in American
policymaking. Quinn Wilhelmi, one of the organization's founders, often told
students that "the three pillars of politics are money, bodies, and ideas."
When asked for money, young citizens gave what little they could; and when
asked for bodies they joined protests, voter-registration drives, and
neighborhood canvasses to get out the vote. But no one ever asked them for
ideas. And while money and bodies put politicians in power, the war of ideas is
waged "between elections" through public policy. Soon after the '04 election,
Kai Stinchcombe was trying to figure out what to do next. He had toiled for the
Kerry presidential campaign alongside countless young politicos, and yet the
election offered little reprieve; they remained just as passionate the day
after the election as they had been the day before, except now they lacked
something to do. So he returned to Stanford and emailed a few list-servs
suggesting they form a progressive student think tank to fight the influence of
Stanford's conservative Hoover Institution. The email soon reached Dar
Vanderbeck at Bates College and Jessica Singleton at Middlebury and they
responded, proposing that such an organization could exist on campuses across
the country. This suggestion proved prophetic when a student revealed that his
friend Jesse Wolfson had just launched a similar project at Yale. Kai called
Jesse and the two groups joined forces. These pioneers had realized that
college campuses were brimming with innovative policy analysis, but unlike the
powerful "think tanks" that proactively market to policymakers, students' ideas
weren't reaching anyone. Or, as Roosevelt's founders put it: "Colleges are
already "effectively" think tanks -- just not "effective" think tanks". From
that playful observation grew a resonant call to action and the nation’s
first (and only) student think tank was born. These students would not be
advocates of others’ ideas, but generators of new solutions for classic
problems. With the same fervor they brought to the campaign trail, a new
generation of progressives and informed problem-solvers were preparing to storm
the nation’s political stage. Growing Up. The fledgling network grew quickly
and organically. Chapters experimented with both policy ideas and
organizational structures and shared their best practices online. Students were
excited to collaborate with other schools and small envoys began traveling
between campuses. As the national infrastructure evolved, a team of logistical
staff emerged to help coordinate inter-chapter operations and leading student
policy wonks helped their peers shape raw arguments into meaningful proposals.
The Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt Institute (FERI) awarded the Roosevelt
Institution its first major endorsement and a blessing from the Roosevelt
family. "We’ve been waiting for you for fifty years,” they told the young
social entrepreneurs. This relationship opened many doors and the Roosevelt
Institution's advisory board swelled with enthusiastic leaders in politics,
business, and academia. Gradually, the press took notice of this unusual
student groundswell and coverage from major media outlets helped drive waves of
new chapters. Emboldened, students planned the network's most ambitious
projects to date: publishing a world-class student policy journal, and
gathering all the chapters face-to-face for a first national conference.
However, these endeavors would require resources far beyond the organization's
existing capacity. So they officially incorporated, learned how to fundraise,
hired a few full-time staff, and opened an office. Within months the "Roosevelt
Review" was heading to print and FERI had agreed to host the conference on
FDR's family estate in Hyde Park, NY. The "Roosevelt Review" became the first
tangible proof that the organization could fulfill its central promise, and the
pilgrimage to Hyde Park became the cornerstone of Roosevelt's annual
traditions. Though Roosevelt's policy model initially favored extended in-depth
research, it soon evolved to include more succinct legislative proposals that
cater to busy politicians and staffers. In 2006 Roosevelt even experimented
with narrowing the scope of its agenda by voting on three annual "Roosevelt
Challenges": improving socio-economic diversity in higher education, making
America works for working families, and increasing energy independence.
Students' strategies to address these challenges were published in the "25
Ideas" series. In 2007, the Roosevelt Institution marked a critical milestone
by merging with the Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt Institute. Student leaders
recognized that their organization had outgrown college dorm rooms and deserved
support from a professional staff with greater experience and resources.
Although students would continue to lead the campus network, FERI would provide
invaluable institutional support and learned guidance. This devoted partnership
is still realizing its full potential and has helped insure the Roosevelt
Institution's longevity. Roosevelt Today. Roosevelt's structure has gradually
stabilized. In the early years, students took time off from school to staff the
Roosevelt Institution. Today, there are six full-time recent graduates working
in the New York City office, with support from the FERI employees. There are
now six national policy centers that are consistent year-to year: defense and
diplomacy, economic development, education, equal justice, energy and
environment and health care. Each center has a lead strategist who is
responsible for working with individual students on policy ideas, writing
preemptive policy analyses on national legislation, and guiding the
organization’s policy focused initiatives. Students' work continues to be
published in several collections including the "10 Ideas" series, "Roosevelt
Rx", and "Catalyst: Journal of Energy and Environmental Policy". And the
acclaimed Roosevelt Summer Academy is entering its fourth successful year. With
chapter membership booming, it's clear that students remain drawn to, and
inspired by, the founders' original vision. A host of young leaders have
contributed to this mission, and they've expanded the organization from a few
loosely affiliated schools to the nationwide constellation that The Roosevelt
Institute Campus Network boasts today. Roosevelt Institute | Pipeline. The
Roosevelt Institute officially launched Roosevelt Institute | Pipeline in June
2011. The Roosevelt Institute | Pipeline is a new way for young professionals
to connect to the progressive movement that empowers and provides exciting
opportunities such as creating change in their communities, inserting ideas
into the political dialogue and building a strong network. Roosevelt Institute
| Pipeline members participate in a broad range of activities, including
national fellowships, training opportunities, social events, speaker series,
media placements, and Think Impact programming in addition to local engagement
and change-making. Roosevelt Institute | Pipeline Fellows Program. Roosevelt
Institute | Pipeline establishes infrastructure for young professionals to
advance the progressive movement by creating change as thought leaders and
activists on a local and national stage. To achieve this mission, Roosevelt
Institute | Pipeline is committed to identifying and empowering a group of
young change-makers to impact the political dialogue and create progressive
change through the Roosevelt Institute | Pipeline Fellows Program. The
Roosevelt Institute | Pipeline Fellows program is designed to provide a
platform capable of launching the careers of young progressive thought leaders
and activists through media training, publishing opportunities, direct
mentorship from leading progressives in their field, connections to leaders in
their communities, outlets for local leadership, and a place on the national
stage as a writing and media fellow at the Roosevelt Institute. This platform
will be a stage from which a young professional can advance their unique
perspective on an issue, promote their innovative ideas for progressive change
and amplify their voice as a progressive change-maker. Think Impact Policy
Model. Think Impact encourages student to create policy with impact in mind.
Think Impact brings ideas born at The Roosevelt Institute Campus Network to
practical fruition in communities and society by providing a framework and
grants to advance ideas. One recent Think Impact project provided Wesleyan
University students the opportunity to pursue the development of a magnet high
school in the town of Middletown, Connecticut. Think Impact does two things: it
re-articulates the goals of Roosevelt, to create change in our communities and
society, and gives students a concrete and progressive framework to do so.
Think 2040. Think 2040, launched in early 2010, is a project of the Roosevelt
Institute Campus Network that empowers the Millennial Generation to be the bold
visionaries of their own time. Beginning with conversations across the country
in the spring of 2010, Think 2040 engaged and engages Generation Y on the
issues they care about, challenging them to think boldly and deeply about what
it will take to realize their vision. In launching Think 2040, Roosevelt has
partnered with various organizations both in D.C. and across the United States
to garner data and corrall support. As the conversation continues, participants
are encouraged contribute their insights to the Blueprint for the Millennial
America, a groundbreaking report that seeks to reshape the debate about
America's future. The Blueprint is currently being developed by Roosevelt
staffers and Summer Academy fellows and is expected to be fully conceptualized
and presented in late 2010. On Campus. Each individual chapter of the Roosevelt
Institute Campus Network consists of a number of policy centers, in which
students interested in a given topic can join together and share research,
ideas, and resources. Policy centers at each chapter are assisted by a central
student leadership, typically a President and Vice President. In New York City.
A national staff in New York City supports the work of the campus network.
There are usually five or six individuals in the office. Currently, there is a
national director (Taylor Jo Isenberg) who is largely in charge of the growth
and development of the network. The field director (Winston Lofton) and deputy
field director (Joelle Gamble) manage the regional staffers, part-time paid
students. The policy director (Alan Smith) and deputy policy director (Lydia
Bowers) are in charge of policy initiatives, and legislative work as well as
managing a team of senior fellows, also full-time students that are paid for
part-time work. The Chapter Services Coordinator (Dante Barry) runs the Summer
Academy program. The national staff oversees publications, the development of
the alumni network, and provides opportunities for membership to participate in
writers' conferences and initiatives. During the summer, the Roosevelt Academy
(the Campus Network's major internship program) runs for ten weeks and places
students in DC organizations and at various organizations within the city of
Chicago. The program features a variety of presentations from students who have
published work in the "10 Ideas" series and the "Roosevelt Review", and is the
launching ground for the Institution's policy agenda for the upcoming year. The
Roosevelt Summer Academy. The Roosevelt Summer Academy prides itself in
replacing traditional intern duties like making coffee or photocopies with
legitimate professional responsibilities like marking up legislation or running
conferences. Academy interns receive stipends to work full-time at prestigious
think tanks and other institutions serving the public interest in Washington,
DC, and Chicago. The Academy adds a complementary training curriculum and
weekly networking events to create an integrated program of leadership
development. The objective of the program is to bring new, diverse, and
progressive voices into the political process. The program runs for 10 weeks
from June to August. In 2010, Roosevelt ran two concurrent programs: The
Washington Academy and The Chicago Academy. The Washington Academy placed
twenty students at the Roosevelt Institution's national office as well as at
organizations such as the Center for American Progress, the Economic Policy
Institute, the AFL-CIO, National Security Network, NDN, and Center for
Community Change. The Chicago Academy placed ten students with different
Chicago City Agencies where they worked on energy and environmental policy in
an urban setting. The Summer Academies can also become a springboard for
ambitious young politicos. Kirsten Hill, the Campus Network's lead policy
strategist for education, joined the National Staff after her summer with the
Academy. For more information about the program and this year's fellows, go to
the Summer Academy's website here. Conferences. The Roosevelt Institute Campus
Network hosts a conference each summer for incoming chapter leaders held in
collaboration with the Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt Institute at the FDR
estate, Hyde Park, New York. In the past, the program featured a variety of
presentations from students who have published work in the "10 Ideas" series
and the "Roosevelt Review", and is the launching ground for the Institution's
policy agenda for the upcoming year. In addition, the Campus Network hosts
policy conferences in each of its regions. Until 2009, a Mid-Atlantic
Conference brought the Roosevelt Mid-Atlantic region to Washington, DC. This is
now the DC-International region. Current Publications. The Roosevelt Review.
The "Roosevelt Review" is Roosevelt's general policy journal. Unlike the 10
Ideas series, very few proposals were published in the Review, and the papers
go into much more detail. The Review was distributed nationally to government
agencies as well as advocacy groups, and was published at the end of every
summer. The fourth annual issue was released in 2011. 10 Ideas. The 10 Ideas
publication series is The Roosevelt Institute Campus Network's primary vehicle
for presenting policy ideas to legislators, Congress, communities, and the
nation. It presents the 10 best ideas of student thinkers at The Roosevelt
Institute Campus Network in health care, energy & the environment, education,
equal justice, defense & diplomacy, and economic development as legislative
briefs for maximum impact and resonance. The 10 Ideas series allows student
thinkers to demonstrate their awareness of legislative issues and details, and
present clear steps to implement innovative solutions to societal problems.
Roosevelt Rx. Roosevelt Rx focuses exclusively on student policies for health
care. It was divided into the broad "Issues" section, and the policy-oriented
"Ideas" section. It garnered praise from the leadership of the American Public
Health Association and American Medical Student Association, among others. It
put the Millennial Generation at the forefront of a vibrant debate on Capitol
Hill and the entire country today. Catalyst: Journal of Energy and
Environmental Policy. Catalyst: Journal of Energy and Environmental Policy is a
Roosevelt Institute Campus Network publication that includes summaries for
policymakers, articles, and book reviews. It publishes under the tagline,
"Sound science leads to sound policy." In the past, articles have argued for a
"Federal Regulatory Strategy for Solar Power" and provided an "Analysis of Cap-
and-Trade" for policymakers. Many articles are immediately relevant to
legislation making its way through Capitol Hill today. Historical Publications.
25 Ideas. "25 Ideas" is a set of 25 two-page policy proposals in three
challenge areas. The most recent ideas publications were in the areas of
Energy, Working Families, and Diversity in Higher Education. The three booklets
are produced through the summer between academic school years. Review of Policy
Research. The Roosevelt Institution and the Policy Studies Organization
released a special issue of the "Review of Policy Research" with work from
eight Roosevelt fellows. The issue was Roosevelt exclusive, and focused on both
domestic and international poverty. Campus Network Locations. The Campus
Network itself is divided into six regions: District of Columbia/International,
Northeast, South, Midwest, Mountain West, and West. Advisory Boards. Roosevelt
has a number of prominent individuals who have offered themselves as resources
to the initiative. They assist in organization, feedback with ideas, and
introductions with policymakers. Besides the three listed below, advisory
groups for business and organization exist. Affiliation. In 2008, the Roosevelt
Institution merged with the Roosevelt Institute, and is now known as The
Roosevelt Institute Campus Network.
