Root Force Root Force is a biocentric, decentralized, international direct-
action campaign devoted to "the system that is killing and enslaving [the
planet and its people." The campaign seeks to interfere with the expansion of
global trade infrastructure in Latin America by targeting the corporations
involved in specific infrastructure projects. Its slogan is "Demolishing
Colonialism At Its Foundations." Root Force was launched in 2006 and is focused
on stopping the construction of La Parota dam in Guerrero, Mexico and the
Anillo Periférico highway in San Salvador, El Salvador. Campaign Philosophy
and Strategy. The Root Force campaign incorporates analysis characteristic of
the Latin American solidarity, radical environmental and anti-globalization
movements. According to campaign literature, ills such as environmental
destruction, war, and genocide against indigenous peoples are caused by a
global system and cannot be eliminated without eliminating that system. As
examples of the names given to this system, Root Force cites "'neoliberalism,'
'capitalism,' 'the state' or 'civilization.'" The campaign strategy is founded
on the premise that the US economy depends upon imports from Latin America to
continue functioning, and that these imports depend upon "transportation,
energy, and communications infrastructure.". For this reason, Root Force
opposes infrastructure expansion projects such as the Plan Puebla Panama and
the Initiative for the Integration of South American Infrastructure. More
specifically, Root Force encourages direct action against companies involved in
specific infrastructure projects, with the goal of forcing those companies to
end their involvement. A list of targeted companies is published on the
campaign web site. Root Force compares this strategy to that used by the anti-
vivisection movement, the anti-apartheid movement and ACT UP. Like other
segments of the anti-globalization movement, it also directs criticism and
encourages action against international financial institutions, including the
Inter-American Development Bank and the Central American Bank for Economic
Integration. The specific projects opposed by Root Force are the La Parota dam
in Guerrero, Mexico and the Anillo Periférico highway in San Salvador, El
Salvador. History. An eight-page spread about Root Force was published in the
September-October 2006 issue of the Earth First! Journal. In October 2006, a
"Root Force Road Show" traveled the eastern US to publicize the campaign. As of
February 2007, plans were underway for a western road show. In January 2007,
Root Force, along with Rising Tide North America, Arizona Earth First! and a
Florida group called Justicia Global, called for boycotts and protests of
CompUSA, Kmart and Sears due to links between those companies and plans for La
Parota dam.
