Rotvoll controversy The Rotvoll controversy refers to a political controversy
in Norway in 1991 concerning the construction of a research and development
(R&D) facility for Statoil at Rotvoll outside Trondheim. Key events. The
background for the controversy was that Statoil wanted to establish a new
research and development centre in Trondheim, and had acquired land at the
recreational area Rotvoll to the east of Trondheim. This area was an
agriculture boundary right outside Trondheim, and was connected to Leangenbukta
(English: Leangen Bay), an important bird life area. There were some old farms
at Rotvoll as well, considered to be worth protecting. There was a lot of
secrecy around the formal approval of the construction at Rotvoll, and the
approval process did not, like the law required, undertake a study of the
consequences for the environment. Both the Norwegian Directorate for Nature
Management, the County Governor and city antiquarian opposed the construction.
Nonetheless, the city council gave Statoil permission to proceed. The
controversy became national on 30 June when the Norwegian Broadcasting
Corporation made a large story on the national news, followed up by a number of
national newspapers. The strategy had been chosen to remind Prime Minister Gro
Harlem Brundtland of the Alta controversy that had been a large political
burden on the government in which she was Minister of the Environment in the
early 1980s. The main content of the news was the tent camp that had been
established at Rotvoll, to prohibit the construction. The tent camp consisted
among others of members of Natur og Ungdom and the Norwegian Society for the
Conservation of Nature. In the first week of the tent camp there was sunshine,
but since then it was continuously rainy. Each weekend there was a family day
at Rotvoll, including appearances of singer Hans Rotmo. Statoil refused to
accept any of the alternative locations provided by the environmentalists,
despite meetings between the CEO Harald Norvik and environmentalists. Statoil
also had multiple full-page advertisements in the Trondheim newspapers
"Arbeider-Avisa" and "Adresseavisen". After school start in August there were
few activists left at the camp, and in early October Statoil sent a letter to
them informing them that they would start construction soon. On 10 October 1991
the police woke the activists and informed them that Statoil was to start
construction. This resulted in a quick mobilisation and 75 activists refusing
to move in civil disobedience. They were removed by the police, and that day
the construction workers did as much damage as possible to hinder more actions,
but the next day 65 people let themselves be arrested to hinder construction.
The following day a legal demonstration was held by 500 people outside the
construction area. Legacy. The controversy was quite prominent in Trondheim,
and though Statoil Rotvoll was built, it resulted in other environmental
victories later
