Royal Commissions Act 1902 __NOTOC__ The Royal Commissions Act of 1902 is a
piece of Australian legislation giving the Australian Governor-General the
power to initiate an investigation, referred to as a Royal Commission. Royal
Commissions are a major independent public inquiry into an issue, initiated by
the government. They often investigate cases of Political corruption or matters
of significant public concern. A Royal Commissioner is appointed to chair the
Commission. The Commissioner has considerable powers, generally greater even
than those of a judge. However, the powers of the Commissioner are restricted
to the "Terms of Reference" of the Commission. Once a Commission has started
the government cannot end it, and thus the government is usually very careful
in framing the Terms of Reference. Legislation. The Royal Commissions Act was
assented on 8 August 1902. The Act allows the Governor-General to issue a
Commission of inquiry. Specifically, the Act grants the Governor-General the
power to make or authorize any inquiry, or to issue any commission to make any
inquiry, by Letters patent in the name of the king. The terms must relate to
the peace, order and good government of the Commonwealth, any public purpose or
any power of the Commonwealth. The legislation provides for a member of a
Commission to summon a person to appear before the Commission at a hearing, to
give evidence or produce documents or other things specified in the summons. It
is at the discretion of the Commission as to whether a person appearing at a
hearing is required to take an oath or affirmation. Failing to attend as
summoned can result in a $1,000 fine or imprisonment for six months. However,
the Act excuses the penalty for failing to attend if a reasonable excuse can be
provided (self-incrimination is not a reasonable excuse, however statements or
documents tended by witnesses are not admissible in evidence against the
witness). See also. List of Australian Royal Commissions Australian Royal
Commissioners
