Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam The Rubáiyát of Omar Khayyám () is the title that
Edward FitzGerald gave to his translation of a selection of poems, originally
written in Persian and of which there are about a thousand, attributed to Omar
Khayyám (1048–1131), a Persian poet, mathematician and astronomer. A
"ruba'i" is a two-line stanza with two parts (or hemistichs) per line, hence
the word "rubáiyát" (derived from the Arabic language root for "four"),
meaning "quatrains". Translations. The nature of a translation very much
depends on what interpretation one places on Khayyam's philosophy. The fact
that the rubaiyat are a collection of quatrains - and may be selected and
rearranged subjectively to support one interpretation or another - has led to
widely differing versions. Nicolas took the view that Khayyam himself clearly
was a Sufi. Others have seen signs of mysticism, even atheism, or conversely
devout and orthodox Islam. FitzGerald gave the Rubaiyat a distinct fatalistic
spin, although it has been claimed that he softened the impact of Khayyam's
nihilism and his preoccupation with the mortality and transience of all things.
Even such a question as to whether Khayyam was pro- or anti-alcohol gives rise
to more discussion than might at first glance have seemed plausible. Edward
FitzGerald versions. The translations best known in English are those by Edward
FitzGerald (1809–1883). Of the five editions published, four were published
under the authorial control of FitzGerald. The fifth edition, which contained
only minor changes from the fourth, was edited after his death on the basis of
manuscript revisions FitzGerald had left. FitzGerald also produced Latin
translations of certain rubaiyat. As a work of English literature FitzGerald's
version is a high point of the 19th century and has been greatly influential.
Indeed, the term "Rubaiyat" by itself has come to be used to describe the
quatrain rhyme scheme that FitzGerald used in his translations: AABA. However,
as a translation of Omar Khayyam's quatrains, it is not noted for its fidelity.
Many of the verses are paraphrased, and some of them cannot be confidently
traced to any one of Khayyam's quatrains at all. Some critics informally refer
to the FitzGerald's English versions as ""The Rubaiyat of FitzOmar"", a
nickname that both recognizes the liberties FitzGerald inflicted on his
purported source and also credits FitzGerald for the considerable portion of
the "translation" that is his own creation. In fact, FitzGerald himself
referred to his work as "transmogrification". "My translation will interest you
from its form, and also in many respects in its detail: very un-literal as it
is. Many quatrains are mashed together: and something lost, I doubt, of Omar's
simplicity, which is so much a virtue in him" (letter to E. B. Cowell, 9/3/58).
And, "I suppose very few People have ever taken such Pains in Translation as I
have: though certainly not to be literal. But at all Cost, a Thing must live:
with a transfusion of one’s own worse Life if one can’t retain the
Original’s better. Better a live Sparrow than a stuffed Eagle" (letter to E.
B. Cowell, 4/27/59). Here with a Loaf of Bread beneath the Bough, A Flask of
Wine, a Book of Verse - and Thou Beside me singing in the Wilderness - And
Wilderness is Paradise enow.
The following are several samples of Fitzgerald's translation, concluding with
another Some for the pleasures here below Others yearn for The Prophet's
Paradise to come; Ah, take the cash and let the credit go, Nor heed the rumble
of a distant drum And much as Wine has played the Infidel And robbed me of my
robe of Honour, well ... I often wonder what the vintners buy One half so
precious as the stuff they sell For some we loved, the loveliest and best That
from His rolling vintage Time has pressed, Have drunk their glass a round or
two before, And one by one crept silently to rest But helpless pieces in the
game He plays Upon this chequer-board of Nights and Days He hither and thither
moves, and checks ... and slays Then one by one, back in the Closet lays "The
Moving Finger writes: and, having writ, Moves on: nor all thy Piety nor Wit
Shall lure it back to cancel half a Line, Nor all thy Tears wash out a Word of
it."  Graf von Schack. Adolf Friedrich von Schack (1815–1894) published a
German translation in 1878. Gönnt mir, mit dem Liebchen im Gartenrund Zu
weilen bei süßem Rebengetränke, Und nennt mich schlimmer als einen Hund,
Wenn ferner an’s Paradies ich denke!  Omar Kayyim' Friedrich von Bodenstedt.
Friedrich Martinus von Bodenstedt (1819–1892) published a German translation
in 1881. The translation eventually consisted of 395 quatrains. Im Frühling
mag ich gern im Grüne weilen Und Einsamkeit mit einer Freundin teilen Ich
lasse keinen andern Himmel gelten.  Edward Henry Whinfield. Two English
editions by Whinfield (1836-?) consisted of 253 quatrains in 1882 and 500 in
1883. In the sweet spring a grassy bank I sought And thither wine and a fair
Houri brought; And, though the people called me graceless dog, Gave not to
Paradise another thought!  J.B. Nicolas. The first French translation, of 464
quatrains in prose, was made by J.B. Nicolas, chief interpreter at the French
Embassy in Persia in 1867. John Leslie Garner. An English translation of 152
quatrains, published in 1888. Yes, Loved One, when the Laughing Spring is
blowing, With Thee beside me and the Cup o’erflowing, I pass the day upon
this Waving Meadow, And dream the while, no thought on Heaven bestowing.
Justin Huntly McCarthy. Justin Huntly McCarthy (1859–1936) (Member of
Parliament for Newry) published prose translations of 466 quatrains in 1889. In
Spring time I love to sit in the meadow with a paramour perfect as a Houri and
goodly jar of wine, and though I may be blamed for this, yet hold me lower than
a dog if ever I dream of Paradise.  Richard Le Gallienne. Look not above, there
is no answer there; Pray not, for no one listens to your prayer; Near is as
near to God as any Far, And Here is just the same deceit as There. "(#78, on p.
44)" And do you think that unto such as you; God gave the secret, and denied it
me?-- Well, well, what matters it! Believe that, too. "(#85, p. 47)" "Did God
set grapes a-growing, do you think, And at the same time make it sin to drink?
Give thanks to Him who foreordained it thus-- Surely He loves to hear the
glasses clink!" "(#91, p. 48)"  Edward Heron-Allen. Edward Heron-Allen
(1861–1943) published a prose translation in 1898. He also wrote an
introduction to an edition of Frederick Rolfe (Baron Corvo) ’s translation
into English of Nicolas’s French translation. I desire a little ruby wine and
a book of verses, Just enough to keep me alive, and half a loaf is needful; And
then, that I and thou should sit in a desolate place Is better than the kingdom
of a sultan. Franz Toussaint. The best-known version in French is the free
verse edition by Franz Toussaint (1879–1955) published in 1924. This
translation consisting of 170 quatrains was done from the original Persian
text, while most of the other French translations were themselves translations
of FitzGerald's work. The "Éditions d'art Henri Piazza" published the book
almost unchanged between 1924 and 1979. Toussaint's translation has served as
the basis of subsequent translations into other languages, but Toussaint did
not live to witness the influence his translation has had. A. J. Arberry. In
1959, Professor A. J. Arberry, a distinguished scholar of Persian and Arabic,
attempted to produce a scholarly edition of Khayyam, based on thirteenth-
century manuscripts. However, his manuscripts were subsequently exposed as
twentieth-century forgeries. Robert Graves and Omar Ali-Shah. While Arberry’s
work had been misguided, it was published in good faith. The 1967 translation
of the Rubáiyat by Robert Graves and Omar Ali-Shah, however, created a
scandal. The authors claimed it was based on a twelfth-century manuscript
located in Afghanistan, where it was allegedly utilized as a Sufi teaching
document. But the manuscript was never produced, and British experts in Persian
literature were easily able to prove that the translation was in fact based on
Edward Heron Allen's analysis of possible sources for FitzGerald’s work.
Should our day's portion be one mancel loaf, A haunch of mutton and a gourd of
wine Set for us two alone on the wide plain, No Sultan's bounty could evoke
such joy. A gourd of red wine and a sheaf of poems — A bare subsistence, half
a loaf, not more — What Sultan could we envy on his throne?  Peter Avery and
John Heath-Stubbs. A modern version of 235 quatrains, claiming to be "as
literal an English version of the Persian originals as readability and
intelligibility permit", published in 1979. Their edition provides two versions
of the thematic quatrain, the first (98) considered by the Persian writer Sadeq
Hedayat to be a spurious attribution. 98. I need a jug of wine and a book of
poetry, Half a loaf for a bite to eat, Then you and I, seated in a deserted
spot, Will have more wealth than a Sultan's realm.  234. If chance supplied a
loaf of white bread, Two casks of wine and a leg of mutton, In the corner of a
garden with a tulip-cheeked girl, There'd be enjoyment no Sultan could outdo.
Karim Emami. In 1988, the Rubaiyat were translated by a Persian translator for
the first time. Karim Emami's translation of the Rubaiyat was published under
the title "The Wine of Nishapour" in Paris. "The Wine of Nishapour" is the
collection of Khayyam's poetry by Shahrokh Golestan, including Golestan's
pictures in front of each poem. Emami was an outstanding translator of English
in Iran, who had also translated many contemporary Persian poems. It's early
dawn, my love, open your eyes and arise Gently imbibing and playing the lyre;
For those who are here will not tarry long, And those who are gone will not
return.  In spring if a houri-like sweetheart Gives me a cup of wine on the
edge of a green cornfield, Though to the vulgar this would be blasphemy, If I
mentioned any other Paradise, I'd be worse than a dog.  Ahmed Rami. Ahmed Rami,
a famous late Egyptian poet, translated the work into Arabic. His translation
was sung by Umm Kulthum. Ahmad Saidi. Ah, would there were a loaf of bread as
fare, A joint of lamb, a jug of vintage rare, And you and I in wilderness
encamped— No Sultan’s pleasure could with ours compare.  The sphere upon
which mortals come and go, Has no end nor beginning that we know; Whence do we
come and whither do we go.  The Folio Society. Printed in 2012, this edition is
based off of the first edition translation done by Edward FitzGerald . However,
adding to this english translation is an introduction done by A.S. Byatt and
small emendations throughout the text. These emendations have, arguably,
created the best english translation of Omar Khayyam to date . Awake! for
Morning in the Bowl of Night And Lo! the Hunter of the East has caught The
Sultán’s Turret in a Noose of Light.  Authenticity and analysis. The number
of quatrains attributed to Khayyam varies from about 1,200 (according to Saeed
Nafisi) to over 2,000. Many scholars believe that not all the attributed
quatrains are authentic and some have been added to Khayyam's Diwan in later
years for various reasons. A few literary researchers, for example, Mohammad-
Ali Foroughi and Farzaneh Aghaeipour have selected and published a subset of
the quatrains believed to be original using various research methods. Mystical
interpretation. "Wine of the Mystic" by Paramahansa Yogananda, is an
illustrated interpretation of the FitzGerald translation. Each quatrain is
accompanied with Persian text, a glossary of terms, Yoganada's spiritual
interpretation, and practical interpretation. It won the 1994 Benjamin Franklin
Award in the field of Religion. Yogananda makes an argument for the mystical
basis of Khayyam's Rubaiyat. In "Who is the Potter? ", Abdullah Dougan, a
Naqshbandi Sufi, provides a verse-by-verse commentary of the Rubaiyat. Dougan
says that while Omar is a minor Sufi teacher compared to the giants – Rumi,
Attar and Sana’i, for us he is a marvelous man because we can feel for him
and understand his approach. The work is much more accessible than Sana’i’s
for instance; "Every line of the Rubaiyat has more meaning than almost anything
you could read in Sufi literature". Dougan says that the many critics of
Fitzgerald miss the point as he is only an instrument for what Allah wanted to
happen – there have been many more literally correct translations, but
Fitzgerald’s is divine inspiration, something far superior, a miracle. In
Dougan’s opinion, while many read the Rubaiyat literally and hence see Omar
as a materialist, he is in fact a spiritual teacher and is much maligned
because people do not understand him. Abdullah Dougan says the work is deeply
esoteric and "if you approach the quatrains with that in mind, the poem will
have a tremendous impact on you as you try to understand it." Religious beliefs
were deeply instilled in the people of the time, which gave much influence to
the clergy, and the prosecution of poets who made statements contradictory to
religious messages were prevalent, as was the case with Hafiz (whose house was
raided several times, and was forced to burn some of his more liberal poems)
and Ferdowsi (who was branded a heretic and was not permitted to be buried in
the Muslims graveyard). The mystic interpretation of themes in poetry which
were contrary to Islamic teachings became popular after the Safavid dynasty
rise to power and the establishing of Twelver school of Shi'a Islam as the
official religion of Iran. At this time poets such as Ferdowsi (who glorified
the pre-Islamic Iran and patriotism), Hafiz (with his Epicurean view on life)
and Khayyam (with openly agnostic themed poetry) had already found their roots
among Iranian culture and their works were looked upon as masterpieces of
Persian literature. In order to justify their popularity and lay “credence”
to their messages, many Haram themes were interpreted as having hidden mystical
meanings and parallels were drawn between verses and Shi'a themes and
traditions. Some religious hardliners however repudiated Khayyam and the like
altogether (and to a lesser extent still do today). Putting aside all this
Khayyam never identified himself as a Sufi nor did anyone in his time. In fact
on several occasions he mocks the devoutly religious who criticize the non
religious. Influence. Lovecraft was obsessed with the Arabian Nights and had no
doubt read the Fitzgerald translation - the couplet follows Fitzgerald's metre
and rhyme pattern for the first half of a Khayyam quatrain.
