Sabotage Sabotage is a deliberate action aimed at weakening another entity
through subversion, obstruction, disruption, or destruction. In a workplace
setting, sabotage is the conscious withdrawal of efficiency generally directed
at causing some change in workplace conditions. One who engages in sabotage is
a saboteur. As a rule, saboteurs try to conceal their identities because of the
consequences of their actions. For example, whereas an environmental pressure
group might be happy to be identified with an act of sabotage, it would not
want the individual identities of the perpetrators known. Etymology. Luddites
and radical labor unions such as the Industrial Workers of the World (IWW) have
advocated sabotage as a means of self-defense and direct action against unfair
working conditions. Roughneck, The Life and Times of Big Bill Haywood, Peter
Carlson, 1983, page 152. For the IWW, sabotage came to mean any withdrawal of
efficiency — including the slowdown, the strike, working to rule or creative
bungling of job assignments. One of the most severe examples was at the
construction site of the Robert-Bourassa Generating Station in 1974, when
workers used bulldozers to topple electric generators, damaged fuel tanks, and
set buildings on fire. The project was delayed a year, and the direct cost of
the damage estimated at $2 million CAD. The causes were not clear, however
three factors have been cited: inter-union rivalry, poor working conditions,
and the perceived arrogance of American executives of the contractor, Bechtel
Corporation. As environmental action. Certain groups turn to destruction of
property in order to immediately stop environmental destruction or to make
visible arguments against forms of modern technology they consider detrimental
to the earth and its inhabitants. The FBI and other law enforcement agencies
use the term eco-terrorist when applied to damage of property. Proponents argue
that since property can not feel terror, damage to property is more accurately
described as sabotage. Opponents, by contrast, point out that property owners
and operators can indeed feel terror. The image of the monkey wrench thrown
into the moving parts of a machine to stop it from working was popularized by
Edward Abbey in the novel The Monkeywrench Gang and has been adopted by eco-
activists to describe destruction of earth damaging machinery. As war tactic.
In war, the word is used to describe the activity of an individual or group not
associated with the military of the parties at war (such as a foreign agent or
an indigenous supporter), in particular when actions result in the destruction
or damaging of a productive or vital facility, such as equipment, factories,
dams, public services, storage plants or logistic routes. Prime examples of
such sabotage are the events of Black Tom and the Kingsland Explosion. Unlike
acts of terrorism, acts of sabotage do not always have a primary objective of
inflicting casualties. Saboteurs are usually classified as enemies, and like
spies may be liable to prosecution and criminal penalties instead of detention
as a prisoner of war. It is common for a government in power during war or
supporters of the war policy to use the term loosely against opponents of the
war. Similarly, German nationalists spoke of a stab in the back having cost
them the loss of World War I. A modern form of sabotage is the distribution of
software intended to damage specific industrial systems. For example, the CIA
is alleged to have sabotaged a Siberian pipeline during the Cold War, using
information from the Farewell Dossier. A more recent case may be the Stuxnet
computer worm, which was designed to subtly infect and damage specific types of
industrial equipment. Based on the equipment targeted and the location of
infected machines, security experts believe it to be an attack on the Iranian
nuclear program by the United States, Israel or, according to the latest news,
even Russia. Sabotage, done well, is inherently difficult to detect and
difficult to trace to its origin. During WWII, the FBI investigated 19,649
cases of sabotage and concluded the enemy had not caused any of them. Sabotage
in warfare, according to the OSS manual, varies from highly technical "coup de
main" acts that require detailed planning and the use of specially trained
operatives, to innumerable simple acts which the ordinary individual citizen-
saboteur can perform. Simple sabotage is carried out in such a way as to
involve a minimum danger of injury, detection, and reprisal. There are two main
methods of sabotage; physical destruction and the "human element." While
physical destruction as a method is self-explanatory, its targets are nuanced,
reflecting objects to which the saboteur has normal and inconspicuous access in
everyday life. The "human element" is based on universal opportunities to make
faulty decisions, to adopt a non-cooperative attitude, and to induce others to
follow suit. From the section entitled, “General Devices for Lowering Morale
and Creating Confusion” comes the following quintessential simple sabotage
advice: Act stupid. Value of Simple Sabotage in Wartime. The United States
Office of Strategic Services, later renamed the CIA, noted specific value in
committing simple sabotage against the enemy during wartime: "slashing tires,
draining fuel tanks, starting fires, starting arguments, acting stupidly,
short-circuiting electric systems, abrading machine parts will waste materials,
manpower, and time." To underline the importance of simple sabotage on a
widespread scale, they wrote, "widespread practice of simple sabotage will
harass and demoralize enemy administrators and police." The OSS was also
focused on the battle for hearts and minds during wartime; "the very practice
of simple sabotage by natives in enemy or occupied territory may make these
individuals identify themselves actively with the United Nations War effort,
and encourage them to assist openly in periods of Allied invasion and
occupation." Sabotage in World War I. On 11 January 1917, Fiodore Wozniak,
using a rag saturated with phosphorus or an incendiary pencil supplied by
German sabotage agents, set fire to his workbench at an ammunition assembly
plant near Kingsland, NY, causing a four-hour fire that destroyed half a
million 3-inch explosive shells and destroyed the plant for an estimated at 17
million in damages. Wozniak's involvement was not discovered until 1927. 12
February 1917, Beduins loyal to the British destroyed a Turkish railroad near
the port of Wajh, derailing a Turkish locomotive. The Beduins traveled by camel
and used explosives which demolished a portion of the track. 30 July 1916 Black
Tom explosion Post World War I. In Ireland, The Irish Republican Army used
sabotage against the British following the Easter 1916 uprising. The IRA
compromised communication lines and lines of transportation and fuel supplies.
The IRA also employed passive sabotage, refusing dock and train workers to work
on ships and rail cars used by the government. In 1920, agents of the IRA
committed arson against at least fifteen British warehouses in Liverpool. The
following year, the IRA set fire to numerous British targets again, including
the Dublin Customs House, this time sabotaging most of Liverpool's firetrucks
in the firehouses before lighting the matches. Sabotage in World War II.
Sabotage training for the Allies of World War II consisted of teaching would-be
saboteurs the key components to working machinery on which to focus their
destruction. "Saboteurs learned hundreds of small tricks to cause the Germans
big trouble. The cables in a telephone junction box... could be jumbled to make
the wrong connections when numbers were dialed. A few ounces of plastique,
properly placed, could bring down a bridge, cave in a mine shaft, or collapse
the roof of a railroad tunnel." The French Resistance ran an extremely
effective sabotage campaign against the Germans during WWII. Receiving their
sabotage orders through messages over the BBC radio or by aircraft, the French
used both passive and active forms of sabotage. Passive forms included losing
German shipments and allowing poor quality material to pass factory
inspections. Many active sabotage attempts were against critical rail lines of
transportation. German records count 1,429 instances of sabotage from French
Resistance forces between January 1942 and February 1943. From January through
March 1944, sabotage accounted for three times the number of locomotives
damaged by Allied airpower. See also Normandy Landings for more information
about sabotage on D-Day. During WWII, the Allies committed sabotage against the
Peugeot truck factory. After repeated failures in Allied bombing attempts to
hit the factory, a team of French Resistance fighters and SOE agents distracted
the German guards with a game of soccer while part of their team entered the
plant and destroyed machinery. In 1944 the Germans ran a false flag sabotage
infiltration, Operation Grief. Sabotage Post WWII. From 1948-1960 the Malayan
Communists committed numerous effective acts of sabotage against the Malaysian
Government, first targeting railway bridges, then hitting larger targets such
as military camps. Most of their efforts were centered around crippling
Malaysia's economy and involved sabotage against trains, rubber trees, water
pipes, and electric lines. The Communist's sabotage efforts were so successful
that they caused backlash amongst the Malaysian population, who gradually
withdrew support for the Communist movement as their livelihoods became
threatened. In newly formed Israel from 1945-1948, Jewish groups opposed
British control over Israel. Though that control was to end according to the
Balfour Declaration in 1948, the groups used sabotage as an opposition tactic.
The Haganah focused their efforts on camps used by the British to hold refugees
and radar installations that could be used to detect illegal immigrant ships.
The Stern Gang and the Irgun used terrorism and sabotage against the British
government and against lines of communications. In November 1946, the Irgun and
Stern Gang attacked a railroad twenty-one times in a three week period,
eventually causing shell-shocked Arab railway workers to strike. The 6th
Airborne Division was called in to provide security as a means of ending the
strike. Sabotage in Vietnam. The Viet Cong used swimmer saboteurs often and
effectively during the Vietnam War. Between 1969 and 1970, swimmers saboteurs
sunk, destroyed, or damaged 77 friendly assets. Viet Cong swimmers were poorly
equipped but well trained and resourceful. The swimmers provided a low cost/
low risk option with high payoff; possible loss to the country for failure
compared to the possible gains from a successful mission led to the obvious
conclusion the swimmer saboteurs were a good idea. Sabotage during the Cold
War. On 1 January 1984, the Cuscatlan bridge over Lempa river in El Salvador,
critical to flow of commercial and military traffic, was destroyed by guerilla
forces using explosives after using mortar fire to "scatter" the bridge's
guards, causing an estimated 3.7 million dollars in required repairs, and
considerably impacted El Salvadoran business and security. In 1982 in Honduras,
a group of nine Salvadorans and Nicaraguans destroyed a main electrical power
station, leaving Tegucigalpa, the capital city, for three days without power.
As crime. Some criminals have engaged in acts of sabotage for reasons of
extortion. For example, Klaus-Peter Sabotta sabotaged German railway lines in
the late 1990s in an attempt to extort DM10 million from the German railway
operator Deutsche Bahn. He is now serving a sentence of life imprisonment. As
political action. The term political sabotage is sometimes used to define the
acts of one political camp to disrupt, harass or damage the reputation of a
political opponent, usually during an electoral campaign. See Watergate.
Sabotage in a Coup d'Etat. Sabotage is a crucial tool of the successful coup
d’etat, which requires control of communications before, during, and after
the coup is staged. Simple sabotage against physical communications platforms
using semi-skilled technicians, or even those trained only for this task, could
effectively silence the target government of the coup, leaving the information
battle space open to the dominance of the coup’s leaders. To underscore the
effectiveness of sabotage, “a single cooperative technician will be able
temporarily to put out of action a radio station which would otherwise require
a full-scale assault.” Railroads, where strategically important to the regime
the coup is against, are prime targets for sabotage- if a section of the track
is damaged entire portions of the transportation network can be stopped until
it is fixed. Derivative usages. Sabotage Radio. A sabotage radio was a small
two-way radio designed for use by resistance movements in World War II, and
after the war often used by expeditions and similar parties. Cybotage. Arquilla
and Rondfeldt, in their work entitled "Networks and Netwars", differentiate
their definition of “netwar” from a list of “trendy synonyms,”
including “cybotage,” an agglutination of the words “sabotage” and
“cyber.” They dub the practitioners of cybotage “cyboteurs” and note
while all cybotage is not netwar, some netwar is cybotage. Counter-sabotage.
Counter-sabotage, defined by Webster's dictionary, is "counterintelligence
designed to detect and counteract sabotage." The United States Department of
Defense definition, found in the Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms,
is "Action designed to detect and counteract sabotage. See also
counterintelligence" Counter Sabotage in WWII. During WWII, British subject
Eddie Chapman, trained by the Germans in sabotage, became a double agent for
the British. The German Abwehr entrusted Chapman to destroy the British de
Haviland Company's main plant for the manufacture of heavy bombers, but
required photographic proof from their agent to verify the mission’s
completion. A special unit of the Royal Engineers known as the Magic Gang
covered the de Haviland plant with canvas panels and scattered paper mache
furniture and chunks of masonry around three broken and burnt giant generators.
Photos of the plant taken from the air reflected devastation for the factory
and a successful sabotage mission, and Chapman, as a British sabotage double-
agent, fooled the Germans for the duration of the war.
