Safe seat A safe seat is a seat in a legislative body (e.g., Congress,
Parliament, City Council) which is regarded as fully secured, either by a
certain political party, the incumbent representative personally or a
combination of both. In such seats, there is very little chance of a seat
changing hands because of the political leanings of the electorate in the
constituency concerned and/or the popularity of the incumbent member. The
opposite (i.e. more competitive) type of seat is a marginal seat. In countries
with parliamentary government, parties often try to ensure that their most
talented politicians are selected to contest these seats. This is done in part
to ensure that these politicians can stay in parliament, regardless of the
specific election result, and that they can concentrate on ministerial roles
without needing to spend too much effort on managing electorate-specific
issues. Unsurprisingly, candidate selection for a party's safe seats is usually
keenly contested, although many parties restrict or forbid challenges to the
nomination of sitting members. Other parties will often be compelled to
nominate much less well-known individuals (such as backroom workers or youth
activists in the party), who will sometimes do little more than serve as paper
candidates who do little or no campaigning, or will be trying to use the
contest to gain experience so that they become more likely to be selected for a
more winnable seat. Safe seats can become marginal seats (and vice versa)
gradually as voter allegiances shift over time. However, this shift can happen
more rapidly for a variety of reasons. The retirement or death of a popular
sitting member may make a seat more competitive, as the accrued personal vote
of a long-serving parliamentarian sometimes will have resisted countervailing
demographic trends which come back in force upon retirement. An independent or
third party candidate with an ideology close to that of the incumbent party may
also be able to make a more credible challenge than more established parties.
Also, traditionally safe seats can be more vulnerable in by-elections,
especially for governing parties. The fact that voters in safe seats usually
have little chance to affect election outcomes - and thus, those voters'
concerns can theoretically be ignored by political parties with no effect on
election outcome - is often regarded as undemocratic, and is a major argument
of supporters of various multi-member proportional representation election
methods. These supporters also argue that safe seats receive far less political
funding than marginal seats, as the parties will attempt to "buy" marginal
seats with funding (a process known in America and Australia as "Pork
Barrelling") while ignoring safe seats which can reliably fall to the same
party every time. Australia. In his election analysis, psephologist Antony
Green puts the cutoff between "safe" and "very safe" at 12%. In Australia's
federal system, most rural seats are safe seats for either the National Party
or Liberal Party. Conversely, inner-city and poorer suburban seats are
typically safe Australian Labor Party seats, and a few of the most affluent
inner-middle urban seats are held by the Liberal Party. Marginals are generally
concentrated in the middle-class outer-suburban areas of Australia's larger
state capitals, which therefore decide most Australian federal elections. At
the 2007 federal election, the governing Australian Labor Party's safest seat
was the seat of Division of Batman in Melbourne's inner-northern suburbs, with
a two-party-preferred margin of 26.0%. The safest seat for the opposition
Liberal Party was the rural Victorian electorate of Murray, with a margin of
18.3%. The Liberal Party's junior coalition partner, the National Party's
safest seat was the division of Mallee, also located in rural Victoria, with a
margin of 21.3%. Fiji. In Fiji, prior to the December 2006 military coup,
elections were held under the 1997 Constitution, which allotted 46 of the House
of Representatives' 71 seats on an ethnic basis. 23 were reserved for the
indigenous majority, 19 for Indo-Fijians, 1 for Rotumans, and 3 for members of
all other ethnic minorities. There was a strong tendency towards voting on
ethnic lines. Thus, in the 1999 general election, although the indigenous seats
were split between several parties, all 19 Indo-Fijian seats were won by the
Fiji Labour Party - which won none of the indigenous seats. In the 2001 general
election, the conservative indigenous nationalist Soqosoqo Duavata ni
Lewenivanua party won 18 of the indigenous seats, with the other 5 going to the
ultra-nationalist Conservative Alliance - which later merged into the SDL. All
19 "Indian" seats were retained by the Labour Party. In the 2006 general
election, all Indo-Fijian seats remained safely Labour, while the SDL won all
23 indigenous seats. Among other minorities, only the communal seat of West
Central was a safe seat for the ethnic United Peoples Party. New Zealand. In
New Zealand, many rural electorates, and those based in wealthy suburban areas,
notably the North Shore and eastern suburbs of Auckland, are considered safe
seats for the National Party. An example of a safe National seat is Taranaki-
King Country, currently held by Shane Ardern, who gained 66% of votes in the
2005 election, with only 24.5% of votes going to his Labour rival. By contrast,
inner-city and poorer suburban electorates are safe Labour seats. For example,
in 2005, the seat of Mangere was won by incumbent Labour MP Taito Phillip Field
with 67.7% of the vote, his National rival getting only 12.5% of the vote.
(Ironically, from the resignation of Field from the Labour Party early in 2007
to the general election in 2008, this safest of Labour seats was represented by
an independent MP.) Historically, some seats thought to be safe have witnessed
surprise upsets. Perhaps the most dramatic recent case was the 1996 election,
in which the Maori seats, safe Labour seats for the previous 60 years, were all
won by the New Zealand First Party. The adoption of proportional representation
by New Zealand, beginning in 1996, has decreased the importance of winning
votes in geographical electorates. It remains to be seen what long-term effect
proportional representation will have on the safety of individual electorate
seats. United Kingdom. Examples of safe seats are in the Labour Party
heartlands of North West (Liverpool, Manchester) and North East England (South
and West Yorkshire, Newcastle and Durham), central Scotland (Glasgow and
Edinburgh) and also the urban seats of Birmingham and the West Midlands. Those
of the Conservative Party are in the shires and affluent areas of London, for
example Kensington. An example of a safe Labour seat is Bootle, where in the
2010 general election Labour received 66% of the vote, giving them a 51%
majority over the second-placed Liberal Democrats (at 15%). Beaconsfield is a
safe Conservative seat; in 2010 the party gathered 61% of the vote there,
giving it a 41.5% majority. There are few seats that are very safe for the
Liberal Democrats, as even ones that are perceived to be safe can be lost
unexpectedly: Orkney & Shetland is one of the most reliable Lib Dem seats, and
gave the party 62% of the vote in 2010. The Electoral Reform Society identifies
what it calls "super safe seats", which have been held continuously by one
party since the 19th century. In so doing, it equates seats with their rough
equivalents under previous boundaries. For example, following the 2010 general
election, it identifies the seat of Haltemprice and Howden as having been held
by the Conservative Party since the 1837 general election, although the seat's
current boundaries were only set in 1997. Similarly, it considers that
Wokingham (and a few others) have been held by the Conservative Party since
1885, Devon East, Fylde and Arundel and South Downs since 1868, Hampshire North
East since 1857, Rutland and Melton, Bognor Regis and Littlehampton and East
Worthing and Shoreham since 1841, and Shropshire North since 1835, making it
historically the safest seat of all, having been held without interruption by
the Conservatives since the time of the Tamworth Manifesto, and since before
Queen Victoria's accession to the throne. (For historical reasons, the
Conservative Party being older that the other current main parties, it holds
all the "oldest" safe seats.) Even the safest of seats can be - and sometimes
are - upset. Whilst it is rare for the opposition to take such seats, outside
candidates may be able to. Recent examples include the election of Peter Law
and George Galloway to very safe Labour seats in 2005, and Martin Bell to the
safe Conservative seat of Tatton in 1997. The loss of safe seats can go down in
history. The loss by Michael Portillo of his safe Conservative seat in 1997 has
gone down in history and created the "Portillo moment". This moment has
subsequently been used to describe huge voting swings that generally usher in a
new government, as occurred in 1997. United States. Many American commentators
have decried the tendency of most House seats to become safe seats, decreasing
the number of contested seats in every cycle. This is due in part to the fact
that most congressional districts are drawn by state legislatures to be all but
unwinnable for the district's minority party. Specific U.S. States,
congressional districts, and senate seats since the 1990s are sometimes
referred to as "solid blue" (Democratic Party) or "solid red" (Republican
Party) after the use of these colors in television maps on election night. The
Cook Partisan Voting Index rates congressional districts on how strongly they
lean towards either major party. Currently New York's 15th (Upper Manhattan,
northwestern Queens) and 16th (South Bronx) districts are the most Democratic
at D+41 while, Alabama's 6th (suburbs of Birmingham) and Texas's 13th (far
northern Texas including the Texas Panhandle) are the most Republican at R+29.
Other examples of a safe seat for the Democrats is California's 8th
congressional district in San Francisco. This district and its predecessors
have been in Democratic hands without interruption since 1949. Its current
representative, Nancy Pelosi, was most recently reelected with 80 percent of
the vote. Republican safe seat examples include Tennessee's 1st congressional
district and Tennessee's 2nd congressional district, which combined have been
held by Republicans or their predecessors (except for two terms in the 1st)
since 1859 (despite the switch between the Republican and Democratic parties in
the U.S. south).
