Safe trade Safe trade is a slogan advocated by Greenpeace in its desire to
"green" the World Trade Organisation and the Doha Development Round. It is
designed to compete with "free trade" as a concept. Safe trade is generally
seen as a single framework of rules worldwide to drastically inhibit the flow
of alien organisms (e.g. Genetically modified organisms, imported animals)
across the borders of ecoregions, to preserve their natural wild biodiversity.
It seeks to prevent ecological disasters caused by imported organisms or
untested genetic technologies, and to augment and increase local natural
capital by encouraging soil remediation, precision agriculture, and local
consumption of the native species, rather than imported organisms and heavy use
of pesticides. Proposal. An important achievement of safe trade advocacy is the
Biosafety Protocol agreed in Montreal in January 2000. Although it relied on
the weaker legal principle of Informed Consent and not the much stronger
Precautionary Principle language sought by advocates, the protocol was
considered by most to be a victory that could enhance both biosafety and
biosecurity. Other safe trade reforms seek to advance sustainability by
reducing reliance on energy subsidies and oil-based transport, and (indirectly)
improves equity in economic affairs - that is, it promotes a safer political
economy which is more respectful of life in general. Safe trade is a major goal
of systems of Bioregional democracy and is often advocated alongside it, e.g.
by Greens. Both are also implicitly related to Community-Based Economics, as
local trade in local goods with no reliance on alien organisms presents no
ecological risk to its genomes, soil, or drainage basins. Accordingly, some
advocates argue, local trade in any native species within an ecoregion's
borders should not be taxed at all, as it presents little or no ecological risk
compared to imported goods, and so requires little or no regulation, labelling,
inspection, or other expenses. The assumption that imports carry moral hazards,
and that tax, trade, tariff measures should compensate for harms done, is
shared by advocates of fair trade whose programs address, in addition, more
overt social justice concerns of human beings, such as the maintenance of the
"human capital" of a region. Both initiatives are alternatives to free trade,
which has no such controls, and generally permits and encourages free transit
in goods (but not, in general, labour) across ecological and social borders. A
broader understanding of biosecurity that is emerging under threat of
biological warfare, and the fear that such economically devastating events as
the mad cow disease epidemic could recur, either deliberately (as an act of
bioterrorism) or by accident due to unrestricted imports, is causing some
nations, notably New Zealand, to adopt relatively harsh restrictions against
imported organisms. As one objective of asymmetric warfare is to cause attacks
to appear initially as accidents, or blame slow responses on apparently
incompetent governments, there is some concern that spreading a virulent
organism among animals would be an effective way to attack humans, damage
economies, and discredit governments who are lax on biosecurity. Technologies
for scanning for dangerous organisms at ports and markets are also becoming
more reliable and less expensive. However, no bio-defense solution seems to be
able to compete with a simple reduction of import volumes, and its
corresponding reduction in risk of any accidents. Reception. Opposition.
Critics of safe trade argue that the military and agriculture aspects of
biosecurity are dissimilar, unlikely to converge in the form of an attack
disguised as an accident, and require such differential prevention and response
measures that there is little risk reduced in altering the fundamental
structure of trade relationships to accommodate a robust regime of biosecurity.
Such critics usually argue instead that emergency services' biodefense measures
are sufficient to handle outbreaks of any diseases or alien organisms, and that
such outbreaks are unlikely to be long sustained or deliberately masked as
agricultural accidents. This, to the advocates, seems like wishful thinking.
Support. Advocates point to the costs of emergency measures such as burning
over one million cows suspected of having foot-and-mouth disease in the UK,
smoke from which they calculated (based on dioxin levels) was to be expected to
kill several hundred Britons from cancers in this generation. Safe trade, they
argue, would have removed the need for any such measures, as vaccination of
British beef cattle would have been possible (the burning was to prevent
British exports of beef from being rejected by its trade partners, who would
not have been able to tell vaccinated from infected beef), and the foot-and-
mouth disease was not so dangerous to humans that it could have justified
dooming so many fellow citizens to die of the dioxin-caused cancers. The
burning, they argue, was justified only by bad trade rules that spread
infection and advise dangerous cures that are worse than the ailment itself.
Another argument supporting safe trade rules is that there are links between
primate extinction and deforestation in the regions where primates are
abundant, i.e. the Amazon rainforest, African rainforest, and Sumatran
rainforest. Fail to prevent devastating logging in these regions, advocates
claim, and a Great Ape species will likely become extinct, causing a critical
link to the human past to be permanently lost. Accordingly, preventing logs
from these forests from reaching foreign markets has been a major focus of
Greenpeace actions, especially in 2002.
