Rick Santorum's views on homosexuality Former Republican U.S. Senator and
former U.S. Presidential candidate Rick Santorum, an opponent of LGBT rights in
general, has said that he has "a problem with homosexual acts" and does not
believe the right to privacy under the United States Constitution covers sexual
acts, and also criticized the US Supreme Court ruling in the case of "Lawrence
v. Texas" that ruled to the contrary. Santorum has also stated that the
military's "Don't ask, don't tell" policy, which ended in 2011, should be
reinstated and has voiced his opposition of same-sex parenting. 2003 interview.
In the interview by Associated Press reporter Lara Jakes Jordan, when asked for
his position on the Roman Catholic Church sex abuse scandal, Santorum said that
the scandal involved priests and post-pubescent men in "a basic homosexual
relationship" (rather than child sexual abuse), which led the interviewer to
ask if homosexuality should be outlawed. Santorum then brought up the then-
pending U.S. Supreme Court case "Lawrence v. Texas", which challenged a Texas
sodomy law, and said that "he did not have a problem with homosexuals, but a
problem with homosexual acts", "the right to privacy doesn't exist in my
opinion in the United States Constitution", and "sodomy laws properly exist to
prevent acts which undermine the basic tenets of our society and the family."
The AP also quoted Santorum as saying, "If the Supreme Court says that you have
the right to consensual sex within your home, then you have the right to
bigamy, you have the right to polygamy, you have the right to incest, you have
the right to adultery. You have the right to anything." and "Whether it's
polygamy, whether it's adultery, whether it's sodomy, all of those things, are
antithetical to a healthy, stable, traditional family." When allegations of
bias were leveled against Jordan because she is married to a Democratic
strategist, she made a recording of the interview available. The AP released a
transcript it described as "an unedited section" of the interview on April 23.
Public reaction and criticism. Santorum's comments evoked responses ranging
from George W. Bush's remark, relayed through spokesperson Ari Fleischer, that
"the President believes that the senator is an inclusive man", to sharp
criticism from Howard Dean that "gay-bashing is not a legitimate public policy
discussion; it is immoral", to conservative groups such as the Family Research
Council and Concerned Women for America who came to Santorum's defense.
Democratic politicians responding to Santorum's remarks included Former
Governor of Vermont Howard Dean, who called on Santorum, "to resign from his
post as Republican Conference chairman." Senate Minority Leader Tom Daschle
remarked that Santorum's comments were "out of step with our country's respect
for tolerance". The Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee demanded that
Santorum resign as chairman of the Republican Senate Caucus. Brad Woodhouse of
the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee called the comments, "divisive,
hurtful and reckless." Santorum faced criticism for his comments from
Republican Senators including Olympia Snowe, Susan Collins, Lincoln Chafee, and
Gordon H. Smith. Republican Senator John McCain of Arizona stated, "I think
that he may have been inartful in the way that he described it." Critics of the
statement included the Log Cabin Republicans, and the Republican Unity
Coalition. LGBT rights groups which condemned the comments by Santorum included
the Pennsylvania Gender Rights Coalition, OutFront, the Center for Lesbian and
Gay Civil Rights, and the Human Rights Campaign. The conservative Christian
group Concerned Women for America agreed with Santorum's comments in a written
statement. The group said Santorum was "exactly right" and attributed criticism
of Santorum to the "gay thought police". Director of Concerned Women for
America's Culture and Family Institute, Robert Knight, criticized those
Republicans who spoke out against Santorum, "Maybe they ought to think about
switching parties. It shows great disloyalty to their party to join the sworn
enemies in calling for the head Santorum. They're doing their party a great
disservice." Vice President for Communications at the conservative Family
Research Council Genevieve Wood supported Santorum's remarks, and commented, "I
think the Republican party would do well to follow Senator Santorum if they
want to see pro-family voters show up on Election Day." Conservative
publications released articles supporting Santorum's comments, including
"WorldNetDaily" in an article by Joseph Farah, and "National Review" with a
piece by Robert P. George. In a follow-up statement released after the
Associated Press interview was published, Santorum said some of his remarks
were "taken out of context", and defended his comments in the interview
asserting "It is simply a reflection of the law." In an interview with "Fox
News Channel", Santorum said he was not going to apologize for his remarks, "I
do not need to give an apology based on what I said and what I'm saying now –
I think this is a legitimate public policy discussion. These are not ridiculous
comments. These are very much a very important point." Santorum defended his
remarks, declaring that his comments were not intended to equate homosexuality
with incest and adultery, but rather to challenge the specific legal position
that the right to privacy prevents the government from regulating consensual
acts among adults, a position he disputes, because he does not believe that
there is a general constitutional right to privacy. The dissenting opinion in
"Lawrence v. Texas" (2003) took a similar view—that, as the Texas
homosexuality law had been ruled unconstitutional, because states have no right
to interfere with an individual's choice of sexual partners, then the same
ruling seems to imply that states have no right to legislate against incest,
bigamy, adultery, polygamy, or any other mutually consensual sexual act not
involving minors. Dan Savage's campaign. Dan Savage, a widely syndicated
columnist who was offended by Santorum's remarks, hosted a contest in his
"Savage Love" column for readers to create a definition for "santorum". He
created a website, spreadingsantorum.com, for the winning definition, "The
frothy mix of lube and fecal matter that is sometimes the byproduct of anal
sex". This became a top internet search result for "santorum" in 2003,
displacing the Senator's official website on many search engines, including
Google, Yahoo! Search, and Bing. In 2011, during his presidential campaign,
Santorum requested Google's assistance to end the return of certain search
results, but Google said there was nothing it could do. 2012 presidential
campaign. While campaigning in New Hampshire, Santorum engaged college students
who asked about his position on same-sex marriage and suggested that allowing
it would lead to the legalization of polygamy and other forms of marriage. The
exchange resulted in him being booed at the conclusion of the event. At another
event, Santorum said that children would be better off having a father in
prison than being raised by lesbian parents.
