Satiric misspelling A satiric misspelling is an intentional misspelling of a
word, phrase or name for a rhetorical purpose. This is often done by replacing
a letter with another letter (for example, k replacing c), or symbol (for
example, $ replacing s, @ replacing a, or ¢ replacing c). Satiric misspelling
is found particularly in informal writing on the Internet, but can also be
found in some serious political writing that opposes the status quo. "K"
replacing "C". Replacing the letter "c" with "k" in the first letter of a word
came into use by the Ku Klux Klan during its early years in the mid-to-late
19th century. The concept is continued today within the ranks of the Klan. In
the 1960s and early 1970s in the United States, leftists, particularly the
Yippies, sometimes used "Amerika" rather than "America" in referring to the
United States. It is likely that this was originally an allusion to the German
spelling of America, and intended to be suggestive of Nazism, a hypothesis that
the "Oxford English Dictionary" supports. In broader usage, the replacement of
the letter "C" with "K" denotes general political skepticism about the topic at
hand and is intended to discredit or debase the term in which the replacement
occurs. Detractors sometimes spell former U.S. president Bill Clinton's name as
"Klinton" or "Klintoon". A similar usage in Italian, Spanish, Catalan and
Portuguese is to write ""okupa"" rather than ""ocupa"" (often on a building or
area occupied by squatters, referring to the name adopted by "okupación"
activist groups), which is particularly remarkable because the letter "k" is
rarely found in either Spanish, Portuguese or Italian words. It stems from
Spanish anarchist and punk movements which used "k" to signal rebellion. KKK
replacing C or K. A common satiric usage of the letters "kkk" is the spelling
of "America" as "Amerikkka", alluding to the Ku Klux Klan, drawing to a
perceived notion of an underlying or inherent racism in American society. The
earliest known usage of "Amerikkka" recorded in the "Oxford English Dictionary"
is in 1970, in a journal called "Black World." Presumably, this was an
extrapolation from the then already widespread "Amerika". The spelling
"Amerikkka" came into greater use after the 1990 release of the gangsta rap
album "AmeriKKKa's Most Wanted" by Ice Cube, also used by rapper Spice 1 for
his album "AmeriKKKa's Nightmare" and by Shock Rock band, Undercover Slut for
their album ""Amerikkka Macht Frei"". Currency signs replacing similar letters.
A recent related usage is replacing "E" with the Euro sign ("€") as in
"I€€€" (used by critics of the copyright policy of the IEEE), "€$$O",
"€urope", and "€C" (used by critics of the European Commission who accuse
it of involvement in bribery and corruption). "@" replacing "A", "at", or "O".
Since at least 1980, people have used the "at sign" ("@") as a representation
of the circled letter A. This has been extended to substituting it for the
letter "A" as in the crass fanzine "Toxic Gr@fity" It is often used to combine
feminine and masculine words in Spanish, such as Latin@ to mean Latino/Latina
Hidden puns. Along the same lines, intentional misspellings can be used to
promote a specific negative attribute, real or perceived, of a product or
service. This is especially effective if the misspelling is done by replacing
part of the word with another that has identical phonetic qualities. Examples:
Some place names are also spelled differently in order to emphasize some
political view. For instance, "Brasil" (the Portuguese spelling of "Brazil"),
is sometimes misconstrued as a typo for "Brazil" in English texts.
Alternatively, the English spelling "Brazil" is used in Portuguese pieces of
text as a way to denote Anti-Americanism or Anti-globalization sentiment.
Journalists may make a politicized editorial decision by choosing to
differentially retain (or even create) misspellings, mispronunciations,
ungrammaticities, dialect variants, or interjections. Intentional misspellings,
or spellings used to emphasize dialect, are often used to suggest illiteracy or
ignorance. Witness such permutations as "pubblik skoolz", or "public screwels",
the latter initially associated with talk radio. A similar phenomenon would be
T-shirts saying "I is a kollege stoodent," "Hookt on Foniks Wurks Fur Mee!" or
some such, suggesting that college students are ignorant. Misspellings may also
be used to indicate a speaker's accent, when the writer finds that accent
worthy of ridicule. A well-known example is "nucular", perceived as a regional
or uneducated pronunciation of "nuclear"; "Hahvahd" is meant to reflect the
local pronunciation of Harvard University.
