Saving Saving is income not spent, or deferred consumption. Methods of saving
include putting money aside in a bank or pension plan. Saving also includes
reducing expenditures, such as recurring costs. In terms of personal finance,
saving specifies low-risk preservation of money, as in a deposit account,
versus investment, wherein risk is higher. There is some disagreement about
what counts as saving. For example, the part of a person's income that is spent
on mortgage loan repayments is not spent on present consumption and is
therefore saving by the above definition, even though people do not always
think of repaying a loan as saving. However, in the U.S. measurement of the
numbers behind its gross national product (i.e., the National Income and
Product Accounts), personal interest payments are not treated as "saving"
unless the institutions and people who receive them save them. "Saving" differs
from "savings." The former refers to an increase in one's assets, an increase
in net worth, whereas the latter refers to one part of one's assets, usually
deposits in savings accounts, or to all of one's assets. Saving refers to an
activity occurring over time, a flow variable, whereas savings refers to
something that exists at any one time, a stock variable. Saving is closely
related to investment. By not using income to buy consumer goods and services,
it is possible for resources to instead be invested by being used to produce
fixed capital, such as factories and machinery. Saving can therefore be vital
to increase the amount of fixed capital available, which contributes to
economic growth. However, increased saving does not always correspond to
increased investment. If savings are stashed in or under a mattress, or
otherwise not deposited into a financial intermediary such as a bank, there is
no chance for those savings to be recycled as investment by business. This
means that saving may increase without increasing investment, possibly causing
a short-fall of demand (a pile-up of inventories, a cut-back of production,
employment, and income, and thus a recession) rather than to economic growth.
In the short term, if saving falls below investment, it can lead to a growth of
aggregate demand and an economic boom. In the long term if saving falls below
investment it eventually reduces investment and detracts from future growth.
Future growth is made possible by foregoing present consumption to increase
investment. However savings kept in a mattress amount to an (interest-free)
loan to the government or central bank, who can recycle this loan. In a
primitive agricultural economy savings might take the form of holding back the
best of the corn harvest as seed corn for the next planting season. If the
whole crop were consumed the economy would deteriorate to hunting and gathering
the next season. Interest rates. Classical economics posited that interest
rates would adjust to equate saving and investment, avoiding a pile-up of
inventories (general overproduction). A rise in saving would cause a fall in
interest rates, stimulating investment, hence always I=S. But Keynes argued
that neither saving nor investment were very responsive to interest rates
(i.e., that both were interest inelastic) so that large interest rate changes
were needed. Further, it was the demand for and supplies of stocks of money
that determined interest rates in the short run. Thus, saving could exceed
investment for significant amounts of time, causing a general glut and a
recession. Saving in personal finance. Within personal finance, the act of
"saving" corresponds to nominal "preservation" of money for future use. A
deposit account paying interest is typically used to hold money for future
needs, "i.e." an emergency fund, to make a capital purchase (car, house,
vacation, etc.) or to give to someone else (children, tax bill etc.). Within
personal finance, money used to purchase shares, put in a collective investment
scheme or used to buy any asset where there is an element of capital risk is
deemed an investment. This distinction is important as the investment risk can
cause a capital loss when an investment is realized, unlike cash saving(s).
Cash savings accounts are considered to have minimal risk. In the United
States, all banks are required to have deposit insurance, typically issued by
the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or FDIC. In extreme cases, a bank
failure can cause deposits to be lost as it happened at the start of the Great
Depression. However, since the FDIC was created, no deposits in the United
States have been lost due to a bank failure. In many instances the terms saving
and investment are used interchangeably. For example many deposit accounts are
labeled as "investment accounts" by banks for marketing purposes. To help
establish whether an asset is saving(s) or an investment you should ask
yourself, "where is my money invested?" If the answer is cash then it is
savings,if it is a type of asset which can fluctuate in nominal value then it
is investment.
