School of the Americas Watch School of the Americas Watch is an advocacy
organization founded by Maryknoll Father Roy Bourgeois and a small group of
supporters in 1990 to protest the training of mainly Latin American military
officers, by the United States Department of Defense, at the School of the
Americas (SOA). Most notably, SOA Watch conducts a vigil each November at the
site of the academy, located on the grounds of Fort Benning, a U.S. Army
military base near Columbus, Georgia, in protest over human rights abuses
committed by some graduates of the academy or under their leadership, including
murders, rapes and torture and contraventions of the Geneva Conventions.
Military officials state that even if graduates commit war crimes after they
return to their home country, the school itself should not be held accountable
for their actions. Responding to "mounting protests" spearheaded by SOA Watch,
in 2000 the United States Congress renamed the School of the Americas the
Western Hemisphere Institute for Security Cooperation (WHINSEC), rather than
closing the academy. In addition, all students must undergo a minimum of eight
hours of class on human rights and the principle of civilian control of the
military. Origins. Inspired by the case of slain Archbishop Óscar Romero, who
said "we who have a voice must speak for the voiceless," Father Bourgeois and
two companions posed as military officers and crossed into Ft. Benning in 1983.
The two men and a woman climbed a tree near the barracks housing Salvadoran
troops and read the final homily of Archbishop Oscar Romero through megaphones.
Bourgeois and his companions were arrested and Bourgeois was then sentenced to
18 months in prison for trespassing onto Federal property. Bourgeois and his
followers began to research the School of the Americas, conduct public
education campaigns, lobby Congress, and practice nonviolent resistance at the
School of the Americas facilities. Following the November 1989 murders of six
Jesuit priests, their housekeeper and her daughter at the Central American
University in El Salvador in which graduates of the School of the Americas were
involved, SOA Watch organized an annual protest to be held on the anniversary
of the massacre beginning the next year. The event has been held every year
since then. Objectives. Mission Statement SOA Watch is a nonviolent grassroots
movement that works to stand in solidarity with the people of Latin America and
the Caribbean, to close the SOA/WHINSEC and to change oppressive U.S. foreign
policy that the SOA represents. We are grateful to our sisters and brothers
throughout Latin America and the Caribbean for their inspiration and the
invitation to join them in their struggle for economic and social justice. Non-
violent demonstrations. Protest demonstrations are staged by SOA Watch at the
main gate of Ft. Benning in November each year, in commemoration of the
anniversary of the Murdered scholars of UCA. The growing annual protest has
remained a major focus for SOA Watch and the grassroots movement to close the
SOA/WHINSEC, which likewise has grown throughout the Americas since the first
protest in 1990. The original band of ten resisters who marched onto Ft.
Benning and splashed blood upon the School of Americas to commemorate the first
anniversary of the UCA massacre has grown in recent years to a community of
10,000. People come from across the country and around the globe to honor
victims of the School of the Americas, as well as their survivors, with music,
words, puppets and theatre. Traditionally the legal vigil and memorial service
concludes with a mock funeral procession, using the "Presente! litany", onto
Ft. Benning, with all who choose to march onto the post trespassing on federal
property and subject to arrest. Subsequent to 9/11 and the erection of a
security fence at the main gate of Ft. Benning in 2001, protesters who wish to
take their mourning onto the post need to go over, under, or around that fence,
as opposed to the simple marching of the past. At the 2002 protest, the city of
Columbus began requiring all attending the event to submit to a metal detector
search at the designated entrance. After a lengthy legal battle, however, in
October 2004 the Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals ruled unanimously that the
forced search was unconstitutional. In 2004, the Army added a second fence
topped by razor wire, and erected a third fence in 2005. On November 20, 2005,
roughly 20,000 protesters attended the Ft. Benning vigil, "remembering those
who have been silenced by SOA violence". Forty protesters climbed over or under
the fence and were arrested by military police. Columbus police also arrested
bystanders, including some who lifted the fence. Since protests against the
school began, 183 people have cumulatively served over 81 years in prison for
their civil disobedience. On November 19, 2006, over 22,000 protesters attended
the vigil, a record high attendance number. On December 3, 2006, Georgia Public
Radio broadcasted "The Sounds of Protest at the School of the Americas", an
hour-long documentary with audio collected at the 2006 protest. "Sounds of
Protest" Audio Documentary On November 20, 2010, at least 20 people attending
the vigil were arrested, including Kaelyn Forde, a journalist from Russia
Today, and her cameraman, Jon Conway. They were charged with unlawful assembly,
demonstrating without a permit and failing to obey a police order to disperse.
Forde and Conway were jailed for 29 hours before they were released the
following day on $1,300 bond each. Both workers maintain they were "wrongfully
arrested". Presente litany. The "Presente! litany" is a memorial litany in
which the names of people killed in political repression (usually in Central
and South America) are recited. This litany is used at the annual memorial
service held at the gates of the School of the Americas in Columbus, Georgia,
for those killed by graduates of the school. "Presente" means "here" or
"present" in Spanish. "¡Presente!" newspaper. The movement to close the School
of the Americas (formerly known as the SOA Watch Update) publishes a newspaper,
"¡Presente!", three times a year which is sent to approximately 50,000
subscribers. The purpose of the newspaper is to give updates about the state of
the campaign and of events and developments of the movement.
