Science policy Science policy is an area of public policy concerned with the
policies that affect the conduct of the science and research enterprise,
including the funding of science, often in pursuance of other national policy
goals such as technological innovation to promote commercial product
development, weapons development, health care and environmental monitoring.
Science policy also refers to the act of applying scientific knowledge and
consensus to the development of public policies. Science policy thus deals with
the entire domain of issues that involve the natural sciences. In accordance
with public policy being concerned about the well-being of its citizens,
science policy's goal is to consider how science and technology can best serve
the public. History. State policy has influenced the funding of public works
and science for thousands of years, dating at least from the time of the
Mohists, who inspired the study of logic during the period of the Hundred
Schools of Thought, and the study of defensive fortifications during the
Warring States Period in China. General levies of labor and grain were
collected to fund great public works in China, including the accumulation of
grain for distribution in times of famine, for the building of levees to
control flooding by the great rivers of China, for the building of canals and
locks to connect rivers of China, some of which flowed in opposite directions
to each other, and for the building of bridges across these rivers. These
projects required a civil service, the scholars, some of whom demonstrated
great mastery of hydraulics. In Italy, Galileo noted that individual taxation
of minute amounts could fund large sums to the State, which could then fund his
research on the trajectory of cannonballs, noting that "each individual soldier
was being paid from coin collected by a general tax of pennies and farthings,
while even a million of gold would not suffice to pay the entire army." In
Great Britain, Lord Chancellor Sir Francis Bacon had a formative effect on
science policy with his identification of "experiments of .. light, more
penetrating into nature what others know", which today we call the crucial
experiment. Governmental approval of the Royal Society recognized a scientific
community which exists to this day. British prizes for research spurred the
development of an accurate, portable chronometer, which directly enabled
reliable navigation and sailing on the high seas, and also funded Babbage's
computer. The professionalization of science, begun in the nineteenth century,
was partly enabled by the creation of scientific organizations such as the
National Academy of Sciences, the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute, and State funding
of universities of their respective nations. In the United States, a member of
the National Academy of Sciences can sponsor a Direct Submission for
publication in the "Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences". "PNAS"
serves as a channel to recognize research of importance to at least one member
of the National Academy of Sciences. Public policy can directly affect the
funding of capital equipment, intellectual infrastructure for industrial
research, by providing tax incentives to those organizations who fund research.
Vannevar Bush, director of the office of scientific research and development
for the U.S. government in July 1945, wrote "Science is a proper concern of
government" Vannevar Bush directed the forerunner of the National Science
Foundation, and his writings directly inspired researchers to invent the
hyperlink and the computer mouse. The DARPA initiative to support computing was
the impetus for the Internet Protocol stack. In the same way that scientific
consortiums like CERN for high-energy physics have a commitment to public
knowledge, access to this public knowledge in physics led directly to CERN's
sponsorship of development of the World Wide Web and standard Internet access
for all. Philosophies of science policy. Basic versus applied research. The
programs that are funded are often divided into four basic categories: basic
research, applied research, development, and facilities and equipment.
Translational research is a newer concept that seeks to bridge the gap between
basic science and practical applications. Basic science attempts to stimulate
breakthroughs. Breakthroughs often lead to an explosion of new technologies and
approaches. Once the basic result is developed, it is widely published; however
conversion into a practical product is left for the free market. However, many
governments have developed risk-taking research and development organizations
to take basic theoretical research over the edge into practical engineering. In
the U.S., this function is performed by DARPA. On the other hand, technology
development is a policy in which engineering, the application of science, is
supported rather than basic science. The emphasis is usually given to projects
that increase important strategic or commercial engineering knowledge. The most
extreme success story is doubtless the Manhattan Project that developed nuclear
weapons. Another remarkable success story was the "X-vehicle" studies that gave
the US a lasting lead in aerospace technologies. These exemplify two disparate
approaches: The Manhattan Project was huge, and spent unblinkingly on the most
risky alternative approaches. The project members believed that failure would
result in their enslavement or destruction by Nazi Germany. Each X-project
built an aircraft whose only purpose was to develop a particular technology.
The plan was to build a few cheap aircraft of each type, fly a test series,
often to the destruction of an aircraft, and never design an aircraft for a
practical mission. The only mission was technology development. A number of
high-profile technology developments have failed. The US Space Shuttle failed
to meet its cost or flight schedule goals. Most observers explain the project
as over constrained: the cost goals too aggressive, the technology and mission
too underpowered and undefined. The Japanese fifth generation computer systems
project met every technological goal, but failed to produce commercially-
important artificial intelligence. Many observers believe that the Japanese
tried to force engineering beyond available science by brute investment. Half
the amount spent on basic research rather might have produced ten times the
result. Utilitarian versus monumental science policy. Utilitarian policies
prioritize scientific projects that significantly reduce suffering for larger
numbers of people. This approach would mainly consider the numbers of people
that can be helped by a research policy. Research is more likely to be
supported when it costs less and has greater benefits. Utilitarian research
often pursues incremental improvements rather than dramatic advancements in
knowledge, or break-through solutions, which are more commercially viable. In
contrast, monumental science is a policy in which science is supported for the
sake of a greater understanding of the universe, rather than for specific
short-term practical goals. This designation covers both large projects, often
with large facilities, and smaller research that does not have obvious
practical applications and are often overlooked. While these projects may not
always have obvious practical outcomes, they provide education of future
scientists, and advancement of scientific knowledge of lasting worth about the
basic building blocks of science. Practical outcomes do result from many of
these "monumental" science programs. Sometimes these practical outcomes are
foreseeable and sometimes they are not. A classic example of a monumental
science program focused towards a practical outcome is the Manhattan project.
An example of a monumental science program that produces unexpected practical
outcome is the laser. Coherent light, the principle behind lasing, was first
predicted by Einstein in 1916, but not created until 1954 by Charles H. Townes
with the maser. The breakthrough with the maser led to the creation of the
laser in 1960 by Theodore Maiman. The delay between the theory of coherent
light and the production of the laser was partially due to the assumption that
it would be of no practical use. Scholastic conservation. This policy approach
prioritizes efficiently teaching all available science to those who can use it,
rather than investing in new science. In particular, the goal is not to "lose"
any existing knowledge, and to find new practical ways to apply the available
knowledge. The classic success stories of this method occurred in the 19th
century U.S. land-grant universities, which established a strong tradition of
research in practical agricultural and engineering methods. More recently, the
Green Revolution prevented mass famine over the last thirty years. The focus,
unsurprisingly, is usually on developing a robust curriculum and inexpensive
practical methods to meet local needs. Science policy by country. Most
developed countries usually have a specific national body overseeing national
science (including technology and innovation) policy. In the case developing
countries many follow the same fashion. Many governments of developed countries
provide considerable funds (primarily to universities) for scientific research
(in fields such as physics and geology) as well as social science research (in
fields such as economics and history). Much of this is not intended to provide
concrete results that may be commercialisable, although research in scientific
fields may lead to results that have such potential. Most university research
is aimed at gaining publication in peer reviewed academic journals. A funding
body is an organisation that provides research funding in the form of research
grants or scholarships. Research councils are funding bodies that are
government-funded agencies engaged in the support of research in different
disciplines and postgraduate funding. Funding from research councils is
typically competitive. As a general rule, more funding is available in science
and engineering disciplines than in the arts and social sciences. Australia. In
Australia, the two main research councils are the Australian Research Council
and the National Health and Medical Research Council. Canada. In Canada, the
three main research councils are the Social Sciences and Humanities Research
Council, the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council, and the
Canadian Institutes of Health Research. Additional research funding agencies
include the Canada Foundation for Innovation, Genome Canada, the Networks of
Centres of Excellence partnerships between university, government and industry,
the Minister of Research and Innovation (Ontario), and the Michael Smith
Foundation for Health Research (MSFHR) [http://www.msfhr.org. European Union.
The science policy of the European Union is carried out through the European
Research Area, a system which integrates the scientific resources of member
nations and acts as a "common market" for research and innovation. The European
Union's executive body, the European Commission, has a Directorate-General for
Research, which is responsible for the Union's science policy. In addition, the
Joint Research Centre provides independent scientific and technical advice to
the European Commission and Member States of the European Union (EU) in support
of EU policies. There is also the recently-established European Research
Council, the first European Union funding body set up to support investigator-
driven research. There are also European science agencies that operate
independently of the European Union, such as the European Science Foundation,
European Space Agency, and the European Higher Education Area created by the
Bologna process. Germany. German research funding agencies include the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft, which covers both science and humanities. India.
Research funding by the Government of India comes from a number of sources. For
basic science and technology research, these include the Council for Scientific
and Industrial Research (CSIR), Department of Science and Technology (DST), and
University Grants Commission (UGC). For medical research, these include the
Indian Council for Medical Research (ICMR), CSIR, DST and Department of
Biotechnology (DBT). For applied research, these include the CSIR, DBT and
Science and Engineering Research Council (SERC). Other funding authorities are
the Defence Research Development Organisation (DRDO), the Indian Council of
Agricultural Research (ICAR), the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO),
the Department of Ocean Development (DOD), the Indian Council for Social
Science Research (ICSSR), and the Ministry of Environment and Forests (MEF)
etc. Ireland. Irish funding councils include the Irish Research Council for
Science, Engineering and Technology (IRCSET), the Irish Research Council for
the Humanities and Social Sciences (IRCHSS), and the Science Foundation
Ireland. The Netherlands. Dutch research funding agencies include Nederlandse
Organisatie voor Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek (NWO) and Agentschap NL [http://
www.agentschapnl.nl/. Pakistan. The Government of Pakistan has mandated that a
certain percentage of gross revenue generated by all telecom service providers
be allocated to development and research of information and communication
technologies. The National ICT R&D Fund was established in January 2007 by
Ministry of IT, Government of Pakistan with the vision to transform Pakistan's
economy into a knowledge based economy by promoting efficient, sustainable and
effective ICT initiatives through synergic development of industrial and
academic resources. Switzerland. Swiss research funding agencies include the
Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF) the innovation promotion agency CTI
(CTI/KTI) [http://www.bbt.admin.ch/kti/index.html?lang=en, Ressortforschung des
Bundes and Eidgenössische Stiftungsaufsicht [http://www.edi.admin.ch/esv/.
United States. The United States has a long history of government support for
science and technology. Science policy in the United States is the
responsibility of many organizations throughout the federal government. Much of
the large-scale policy is made through the legislative budget process of
enacting the yearly federal budget. Further decisions are made by the various
federal agencies which spend the funds allocated by Congress, either on in-
house research or by granting funds to outside organizations and researchers.
