Science for the People Science for the People is a left-wing organization that
emerged from the antiwar culture of the United States in the 1970s. A similar
organization of the same name was founded in 2002. I was a founder in 1969-70
of Science for the People. It originated in the coming together of the then
one-year old Scientists and Engineers for Social and Political Action (SESPA)
and a group of Harvard and MIT students who had been invited to participate in
a session of the AAAS annual meeting. SESPA itself was formed in the aftermath
of a struggle in the American Physical Society led by Charlie Schwartz and
Martin Perl and others to get the APS to take a stand against the Vietnam war.
SftP's disruptive tactics at the AAAS meeting and at many scientific meetings
thereafter increased its exposure and the participation of the younger and more
militant among scientists and science students. The first issue of Science for
the People (1970) was produced and edited by me with a comrade who is now my
wife. Subsequent issues were produced by ever changing editorial collectives.
Over its first few years differing views arose on what SftP should be. One
group wanted Science for the People to assume a supportive role in the class
struggle with special attention to the issues of science. Another group wanted
to work towards 'A Science for the People.' Most wanted to be the voice of
critical consciousness from within the scientific community exposing science
against the people and the dangers of the misuse of science. The struggle was
painful and disruptive and not carried on with great clarity. Eventually those
who were more interested in third world and workers struggles etc. than in
science itself left the organization. Over the ensuing years the organization
became primarily identified with its magazine which became an outlet for
critical discussion of the misuse of science. In the process it became
identified with well known critical academic scientists such as Stephen Jay
Gould and Richard Lewontin.[http://www.scienceforthepeople.com/
modules.php?op=modload&name=News&file=article&sid=21] Criticism. I had been
blindsided by the attack. Having expected some frontal fire from social
scientists on primarily evidential grounds, I had received instead a political
enfilade from the flank. A few observers were surprised that I was surprised.
John Maynard Smith, a senior British evolutionary biologist and former Marxist,
said that he disliked the last chapter of Sociobiology himself and "it was also
absolutely obvious to me--I cannot believe Wilson didn't know--that this was
going to provoke great hostility from American Marxists, and Marxists
everywhere." But it was true that I didn't know. I was unprepared perhaps
because, as Maynard Smith further observed, I am an American rather than a
European. In 1975 I was a political naive: I knew almost nothing about Marxism
as either a political belief or a mode of analysis; I had paid little attention
to the dynamism of the activist Left, and I had never heard of Science for the
People. I was not an intellectual in the European or New York/Cambridge sense.
... After the Sociobiology Study Group exposed me as a counterrevolutionary
adventurist, and as they intensified their attacks in articles and teach-ins,
other radical activists in the Boston area, including the violence-prone
International Committee against Racism, conducted a campaign of leaflets and
teach-ins of their own to oppose human sociobiology. As this activity spread
through the winter and spring of 1975-76, I grew fearful that it might reach a
level embarrassing to my family and the university. I briefly considered offers
of professorships from three universities--in case, their representatives said,
I wished to leave the physical center of the controversy. But the pressure was
tolerable, since I was a senior professor with tenure, with a reputation based
on other discoveries, and in any case could not bear to leave Harvard's ant
collection, the world's largest and best. For a few days a protester in Harvard
Square used a bullhorn to call for my dismissal. Two students from the
University of Michigan invaded my class on evolutionary biology one day to
shout slogans and deliver antisociobiology monologues. I withdrew from
department meetings for a year to avoid embarrassment arising from my
notoriety, especially with key members of Science for the People present at
these meetings. In 1979 I was doused with water by a group of protestors at the
annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science,
possibly the only incident in recent history that a scientist was physically
attacked, however mildly, for the expression of an idea. In 1982 I went to the
Science Center at Harvard University under police escort to deliver a public
lecture, because of the gathering of a crowd of protestors around the entrance,
angered because of the title of my talk: "The coevolution of biology and
culture.[http://www.lrainc.com/swtaboo/taboos/wilson01.html] 2002 Revival.
Science for the People is a website and journal written by working scientists
for scientists. At a workshop on science in Florence on November 8th, 2002, a
few of us decided to start a magazine for Working Scientists active in the Anti
Capitalist Movement, as part of the European Social Forum. The magazine will
publish our experiences in popularising science in the European mainstream
media, whilst at the same time attempting to give our contributions a political
dimension. The purpose is to claim 'Science for the People'. Original articles
written by ourselves and published will be republished in the magazine so each
of us may learn from the experience of the others. [http://
www.scienceforthepeople.com] Although the newer group is organizationally
unrelated to the 1970s group, the new group received a message of approval from
Herb Fox, one of the founders of the original group. [http://
www.scienceforthepeople.com/
modules.php?op=modload&name=News&file=article&sid=21]
