Scientific socialism Scientific socialism is the term used by Friedrich Engels
to describe the social-political-economic theory first pioneered by Karl Marx.
The purported reason why this socialism is "scientific socialism" (as opposed
to "utopian socialism") is because its theories are held to an empirical
standard, observations are essential to its development, and these can result
in changes/falsification of elements of theory. Although Marx denounced
"utopian socialism", he never referred to his own ideas as "scientific
socialism". Similar methods for analyzing social and economic trends and
involving socialism as a product of socioeconomic evolution have also been used
by non-Marxist theoreticians, such as Joseph Schumpeter and Thorstein Veblen.
Methodology. Scientific socialism refers to a method for understanding and
predicting social, economic and material phenomena by examining their
historical trends through the use of the scientific method in order to derive
probable outcomes and probable future developments. It is in contrast to what
later socialists referred to as "utopian socialism"; a method based on
establishing seemingly rational propositions for organizing society and
convincing others of their rationality and/or desirability. It also contrasts
with classical liberal notions of natural law, which are grounded in
metaphysical notions of morality rather than a dynamic materialist or
physicalist conception of the world. Scientific socialists view social and
political developments as being largely determined by economic conditions as
opposed to ideas in contrast to utopian socialists and classical liberals, and
thus understand that social relations and notions of morality are context-based
relative to their specific stage of economic development. Therefore as economic
systems, socialism and capitalism are not social constructs that can be
established at any time based on the subjective will and desires of the
population, but instead are products of social evolution. An example of this
was the advent of agriculture which enabled human communities to produce a
surplus; this change in material and economic development led to a change in
social relations and rendered the old form of social organization based on
subsistence-living obsolete and a hindrance to further material progress.
Changing economic conditions necessitated a change in social organization.
Similar perspectives. Thorstein Veblen, the founder of evolutionary economics,
believed that technological developments would eventually lead toward a
socialistic organization of economic affairs. However, his views regarding
socialism and the nature of the evolutionary process of economics differed
sharply from that of Karl Marx; while Marx saw socialism as the ultimate goal
for civilization and saw the working-class as the group that would establish
it, Veblen saw socialism as one immediate phase in an ongoing evolutionary
process in society that would be brought about by the natural decay of the
business enterprise system and by the inventiveness of engineers. Veblen's
methodology for analyzing economic developments is similar to that of
scientific socialism and also contrast to neoclassical/classical political
economy and utopian socialism; he understood that society and economics was
constantly evolving and that this process affected the fundamental basis of
established social relations. Critique of the notion of socialism as a science.
The philosophy of science basis of the claim of Marxism, and in the Soviet
Union, Marxism-Leninism, to be a science is based its conceptions of
dialectical materialism and historical materialism. Although the influence of
Marxist thought especially in the social sciences is great, there are no
communities of theoretical or applied scientists or technicians based on
Marxism. This contrasts with those for disciplines which "do" have established
and credible claims to being theoretical sciences or engineering disciplines,
the planning functions of the current communist states notwithstanding. The
most one could say is that socialism, e.g. Marxism, has, at least historically,
been a current which finds expression in various scientific disciplines such as
mathematical economics, sociology, etc. Socialism and Marxism are thus better
described as theoretical frameworks for understanding and analyzing the social,
economic and political world. Critique of scientific socialist methodology. The
term also refers to an important philosophical difference between proponents of
natural law, static human nature and static equilibrium (such as classical
liberals, libertarians, social liberals and some early socialist thought).
Specifically, these philosophies are based on metaphysical conceptions of a
"natural" order of liberty that exists irrespective of civilizations' material,
technological and productive capabilities. While scientific socialists see
economic laws and various forms of social arrangements as context-based
(relative to their specific stage of human development), and thus relative to
specific material conditions, these critics view them as static and absolute
moral values. Attempts to engineer a new society via methods for doing so such
as those proposed by B.F. Skinner (1949), and others with scientifically
informed and inspired creators such as the early Israeli Kibbutzim and others
on a small scale are known but in practice communist states of the 20th century
did not and do not use scientific methods in a substantive way for this
purpose. The era slogan of the current CCP leader, Hu Jintao, "Scientific
Development" does not so far appear to be an exception to this. Contributions
such as those of Leontief and others were made at a high macroeconomic level or
within fields such as Operations Research on a microeconomic level but within a
capitalist context. The philosopher of science Karl Popper in his book "The
Open Society and Its Enemies" characterized Scientific Socialism as a
pseudoscience. He argues that its method is what he calls "historicism": the
method of analyzing historical trends and deriving universal laws from them. He
criticizes this approach as unscientific as its claims cannot be tested and, in
particular, are not subject to being disproven.
