Search theory In microeconomics, search theory studies buyers or sellers who
cannot instantly find a trading partner, and must therefore search for a
partner prior to transacting. Search theory has been influential in many areas
of economics. It has been applied in labor economics to analyze frictional
unemployment resulting from job hunting by workers. In consumer theory, it has
been applied to analyze purchasing decisions. From a worker's perspective, an
acceptable job would be one that pays a high wage, one that offers desirable
benefits, and/or one that offers pleasant and safe working conditions. From a
consumer's perspective, a product worth purchasing would have sufficiently high
quality, and be offered at a sufficiently low price. In both cases, whether a
given job or product is acceptable depends on the searcher's beliefs about the
alternatives available in the market. More precisely, search theory studies an
individual's optimal strategy when choosing from a series of potential
opportunities of random quality, under the assumption that delaying choice is
costly. Search models illustrate how best to balance the cost of delay against
the value of the option to try again. Mathematically, search models are optimal
stopping problems. Macroeconomists have extended search theory by studying
general equilibrium models in which one or more types of searchers interact.
These macroeconomic theories have been called 'matching theory', or 'search and
matching theory'. Search from a known distribution. George J. Stigler proposed
thinking of searching for bargains or jobs as an economically important
problem. John J. McCall proposed a dynamic model of job search, based on the
mathematical method of optimal stopping, on which much later work has been
based. McCall's paper studied the problem of which job offers an unemployed
worker should accept, and which reject, when the distribution of alternatives
is known and constant, and the value of money is constant. Holding fixed job
characteristics, he characterized the job search decision in terms of the
reservation wage, that is, the lowest wage the worker is willing to accept. The
worker's optimal strategy is simply to reject any wage offer lower than the
reservation wage, and accept any wage offer higher than the reservation wage.
The reservation wage may change over time if some of the conditions assumed by
McCall are not met. For example, a worker who fails to find a job might lose
skills or face stigma, in which case the distribution of potential offers that
worker might receive will get worse, the longer he or she is unemployed. In
this case, the worker's optimal reservation wage will decline over time.
Likewise, if the worker is risk averse, the reservation wage will decline over
time if the worker gradually runs out of money while searching. The reservation
wage would also differ for two jobs of different characteristics; that is,
there will be a compensating differential between different types of jobs. An
interesting observation about McCall's model is that greater variance of offers
may make the searcher better off, and prolong optimal search, even if he or she
is risk averse. This is because when there is more variation in wage offers
(holding fixed the mean), the searcher may want to wait longer (that is, set a
higher reservation wage) in hopes of receiving an exceptionally high wage
offer. The possibility of receiving some exceptionally low offers has less
impact on the reservation wage, since bad offers can be turned down. While
McCall framed his theory in terms of the wage search decision of an unemployed
worker, similar insights are applicable to a consumer's search for a low price.
In that context, the highest price a consumer is willing to pay for a
particular good is called the reservation price. Search from an unknown
distribution. When the searcher does not even know the distribution of offers,
then there is an additional motive for search: by searching longer, more is
learned about the range of offers available. Search from one or more unknown
distributions is called a multi-armed bandit problem. The name comes from the
slang term 'one-armed bandit' for a casino slot machine, and refers to the case
in which the only way to learn about the distribution of rewards from a given
slot machine is by actually playing that machine. Optimal search strategies for
an unknown distribution have been analyzed using "allocation indices" such as
the Gittins index. Endogenizing the price distribution. Studying optimal search
from a given distribution of prices led economists to ask why the same good
should ever be sold, in equilibrium, at more than one price. After all, this is
by definition a violation of the law of one price. However, when buyers do not
have perfect information about where to find the lowest price (that is,
whenever search is necessary), not all sellers may wish to offer the same
price, because there is a trade-off between the frequency and the profitability
of their sales. That is, firms may be indifferent between posting a high price
(thus selling infrequently, only to those consumers with the highest
reservation prices) and a low price (at which they will sell more often,
because it will fall below the reservation price of more consumers). Matching
theory. More recently, job search, and other types of search, have been
incorporated into macroeconomic models, using a framework called 'matching
theory'. Peter A. Diamond, Dale Mortensen, and Christopher A. Pissarides won
the 2010 Nobel prize in economics for their work on matching theory. In models
of matching in the labor market, two types of search interact. That is, the
rate at which new jobs are formed is assumed to depend both on workers' search
decisions, and on firms' decisions to open job vacancies. While some matching
models include a distribution of different wages, others are simplified by
ignoring wage differences, and just imply that workers pass through an
unemployment spell of random length before beginning work.
