Governance Governance is the act of governing. It relates to decisions that
define "expectations", grant power, or verify performance. It consists of
either a separate process or part of management or leadership processes. These
processes and systems are typically administered by a government. When
discussing governance in particular institutions, the quality of governance
within the institutions is often compared to a standard of good governance. In
the case of a business or of a non-profit organisation, governance relates to
consistent management, cohesive policies, guidance, processes and decision-
rights for a given area of responsibility. For example, managing at a corporate
level might involve evolving policies on privacy, on internal investment, and
on the use of data. To distinguish the term "governance" from govern"ment":
"governance" is what "a" "government" does. It might be a geo-political
government (nation-state), a corporate government (business entity), a socio-
political government (tribe, family etc.), or any number of different kinds of
government, but governance is the physical exercise of management power and
policy, while government is the instrument (usually collective) that does it.
The term government is also used more abstractly as a synonym for governance,
as in the Canadian motto, "Peace, Order and "Good Government"". Origin of the
word. The word "governance" derives from the Greek verb κυβερνάω
["kubernáo"] which means "to steer" and was used for the first time in a
metaphorical sense by Plato. It then passed on to Latin and then on to many
languages. Processes and governance. As a process, governance may operate in an
organization of any size: from a single human being to all of humanity; and it
may function for any purpose, good or evil, for profit or not. A reasonable or
rational purpose of governance might aim to assure, (sometimes on behalf of
others) that an organization produces a worthwhile pattern of good results
while avoiding an undesirable pattern of bad circumstances. Perhaps the moral
and natural purpose of governance consists of assuring, on behalf of those
governed, a worthy pattern of good while avoiding an undesirable pattern of
bad. The ideal purpose, obviously, would assure a perfect pattern of good with
no bad. A government, comprises a set of inter-related positions that govern
and that use or exercise power, particularly coercive power. A good government,
following this line of thought, could consist of a set of inter-related
positions exercising coercive power that assures, on behalf of those governed,
a worthwhile pattern of good results while avoiding an undesirable pattern of
bad circumstances, by making decisions that define expectations, grant power,
and verify performance. Politics provides a means by which the governance
process operates. For example, people may choose expectations by way of
political activity; they may grant power through political action, and they may
judge performance through political behavior. Conceiving of governance in this
way, one can apply the concept to states, to corporations, to non-profits, to
NGOs, to partnerships and other associations, to project-teams, and to any
number of humans engaged in some purposeful activity. Different definitions.
This considers the process by which governments are selected, monitored and
replaced; the capacity of the government to effectively formulate and implement
sound policies and the respect of citizens and the state of the institutions
that govern economic and social interactions among them. The state and
politics. Some suggest making a clear distinction between the concepts of
governance and of politics. Politics involves processes by which a group of
people with initially divergent opinions or interests reach collective
decisions generally regarded as binding on the group, and enforced as common
policy. Governance, on the other hand, conveys the administrative and process-
oriented elements of governing rather than its antagonistic ones. Such an
argument continues to assume the possibility of the traditional separation
between "politics" and "administration". Contemporary governance practice and
theory sometimes questions this distinction, premising that both "governance"
and "politics" involve aspects of power. These modes of governance often appear
in terms of hierarchy, markets, and networks - but also in democracies. For
instance, the tripartite governance of the United States consists of three
branches of power (the Executive, its Legislature and the Supreme Court). Fair
governance. A fair governance implies that mechanisms function in a way that
allows the executives (the "agents") to respect the rights and interests of the
stakeholders (the "principals"), in a spirit of democracy. Types of governance.
Global governance. Its defined as "the complex of formal and informal
institutions, mechanisms relationships, and processes between and among states,
markets, citizens and organizations, both inter- and non-governmental, through
which collective interests on the global plane are articulated, right and
obligations are established, and differences are mediated". In contrast to the
traditional meaning of "governance", some authors like James Rosenau have used
the term "global governance" to denote the regulation of interdependent
relations in the absence of an overarching political authority. The best
example of this in the international system or relationships between
independent states. The term can however apply wherever a group of free equals
need to form a regular relationship. Corporate governance. Corporate governance
consists of the set of processes, customs, policies, laws and institutions
affecting the way people direct, administer or control a corporation. Corporate
governance also includes the relationships among the many players involved (the
stakeholders) and the corporate goals. The principal players include the
shareholders, management, and the board of directors. Other stakeholders
include employees, suppliers, customers, banks and other lenders, regulators,
the environment and the community at large. The first documented use of the
word "corporate governance" is by Richard Eells (1960, pg. 108) to denote "the
structure and functioning of the corporate polity". The "corporate government"
concept itself is older and was already used in finance textbooks at the
beginning of the 20th century (Becht, Bolton, Röell 2004). These origins
support a multiple constituency (stakeholder) definition of corporate
governance. Project governance. The term "governance" as used in industry
(especially in the information technology (IT) sector) describes the processes
that need to exist for a successful project. Information technology governance.
IT governance primarily deals with connections between business focus and IT
management. The goal of clear governance is to assure the investment in IT
generate business value and mitigate the risks that are associated with IT
projects. Participatory governance. "See Kafue River article, section
Participatory governance" Participatory governance focuses on deepening
democratic engagement through the participation of citizens in the processes of
governance with the state. The idea is that citizens should play a more direct
roles in public decision-making or at least engage more deeply with political
issues. Government officials should also be responsive to this kind of
engagement. In practice, Participatory Governance can supplement the roles of
citizens as voters or as watchdogs through more direct forms of involvement.
Non-profit governance. Non-profit governance focuses primarily on the fiduciary
responsibility that a board of trustees (sometimes called directors—the terms
are interchangeable) has with respect to the exercise of authority over the
explicit public trust that is understood to exist between the mission of an
organization and those whom the organization serves. Orders of governance. With
the process of governing now involving a variety of private as well as public
actors, governance is becoming an increasingly complex issue. More traditional
theories of conceptualizing and understanding governance (such as the
Westminster system) are now considered unsuitable, as they are too "government-
oriented" and are unable to examine the more complex, modern nature of
interactions between governing actors. This is where the 'Orders of Governance'
conceptualisation comes in. It breaks down governance into three different
orders, first, second and meta, which "correlate to the different levels at
which governance is used" and allow for a more detailed analysis of the
governing process. First-order. First-order governance is the level at which
problems are identified and solutions enacted . This is done through
interaction between the governing organisation and its citizens which helps
identify what the problem is, who is experiencing it and what an appropriate
solution may be. There can be differing opinions in an organisation as to what
constitutes a problem and there is, to some extent, a degree of subjectivity in
coming up with an "ordered problem definition". The interaction with those
being governed helps in this respect as it legitimises the definition. Once a
problem is identified, a solution usually comes in the form of laws and/or
regulations passed by the governing body. Second-order. Second-order governance
is the level at which the "institutional arrangements" are provided "within
which first order governing takes place". Institutional arrangements can take
many forms in both the public (a regulatory agency) and private (the financial
market) sectors. What is important is that a framework is provided that enables
first-order governance to take place. Again, there is a distinct "two-way role"
at this level with both "those being governed and those governing" having input
into the process to provide an effective and legitimate institutional setting.
This approach enables a more comprehensive analysis of governing interactions,
as actors can often "be influenced by institutions (and the way) these help or
hinder them" in the pursuit of their goals. Metagovernance. "Metagovernance" is
widely defined as the "governing of governing". It represents the established
ethical principles, or 'norms', that shape and steer the entire governing
process. It is important to note that there are no clearly defined settings
within which metagoverning takes place, or particular persons who are
responsible for it. While some believe metagoverning to be the role of the
state who are assumed to want to steer actors in a particular direction, it can
"potentially be exercised by any resourceful actor" who wishes to influence the
governing process. Examples of this include the publishing of codes of conduct
at the highest level of international government, and media focus on specific
issues at the socio-cultural level. Despite their different sources, both seek
to establish values in such a way that they become accepted 'norms'. The fact
that 'norms' can be established at any level and can then be used to shape the
governance process as whole, means metagovernance is part of the both the input
and the output of the governing system. Measuring governance. Over the last
decade, several efforts have been conducted in the research and international
development community in order to assess and measure the quality of governance
of countries all around the world. Measuring governance is inherently a
controversial and political exercise. A distinction is therefore made between
external assessments, peer assessments and self-assessments. Examples of
external assessments may be donor assessments or comparative indices produced
by international non-governmental organisations. An example of a peer
assessment may be the African Peer Review Mechanism. Examples of self-
assessments may be country-led assessments that can be led by Government, civil
society, researchers and/or other stakeholders at the national level. One of
these efforts to create an internationally comparable measure of governance and
an example of an external assessment is the Worldwide Governance Indicators
project, developed by members of the World Bank and the World Bank Institute.
The project reports aggregate and individual indicators for more than 200
countries for six dimensions of governance: voice and accountability, political
stability and lack of violence, government effectiveness, regulatory quality,
rule of law, control of corruption. To complement the macro-level cross-country
Worldwide Governance Indicators, the World Bank Institute developed the World
Bank Governance Surveys, which are a country level governance assessment tools
that operate at the micro or sub-national level and use information gathered
from a country’s own citizens, business people and public sector workers to
diagnose governance vulnerabilities and suggest concrete approaches for
fighting corruption. A new World Governance Index (WGI) has been developed and
is open for improvement through public participation. The following domains, in
the form of indicators and composite indexes, were selected to achieve the
development of the WGI: Peace and Security, Rule of Law, Human Rights and
Participation, Sustainable Development, and Human Development. Additionally, in
2009 the Bertelsmann Foundation published the Sustainable Governance Indicators
(SGI), which systematically measure the need for reform and the capacity for
reform within the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
countries. The project examines to what extent governments can identify,
formulate and implement effective reforms that render a society well-equipped
to meet future challenges, and ensure their future viability. [http://www.sgi-
network.de/index.php?page=mission] Examples of country-led assessments include
the Indonesian Democracy Index, monitoring of the Millennium Development Goal 9
on Human Rights and Democratic Governance in Mongolia and the Gross National
Happiness Index in Bhutan. Seat of government. The seat of government is
defined by Brewer's Politics as "the building, complex of buildings or city
from which a government exercises its authority". The seat of government is
usually located in the capital. In some countries the seat of government
differs from the capital, e.g. in the Netherlands where The Hague is the seat
of government and Amsterdam is the de jure capital of the Netherlands. In most
it is the same city, for example Moscow as the capital and seat of government
of Russia. In the United Kingdom, the seat of government is London, the
capital, or more specifically the City of Westminster.
