Secularism Secularism is the principle of separation of government
institutions, and the persons mandated to represent the State, from religious
institutions and religious dignitaries. In one sense, secularism may assert the
right to be free from religious rule and teachings, and the right to freedom
from governmental imposition of religion upon the people within a state that is
neutral on matters of belief. (See also separation of church and state and
Laïcité.) In another sense, it refers to the view that human activities and
decisions, especially political ones, should be unbiased by religious
influence. (See also public reason.) Some scholars are now arguing that the
very idea of secularism will change. Secularism draws its intellectual roots
from Greek and Roman philosophers such as Marcus Aurelius and Epicurus;
medieval Muslim polymaths such as Ibn Rushd; Enlightenment thinkers such as
Denis Diderot, Voltaire, Baruch Spinoza, John Locke, James Madison, Thomas
Jefferson, and Thomas Paine; and more recent freethinkers, agnostics, and
atheists such as Robert Ingersoll and Bertrand Russell. The purposes and
arguments in support of secularism vary widely. In European laicism, it has
been argued that secularism is a movement toward modernization, and away from
traditional religious values (also known as secularization). This type of
secularism, on a social or philosophical level, has often occurred while
maintaining an official state church or other state support of religion. In the
United States, some argue that state secularism has served to a greater extent
to protect religion and the religious from governmental interference, while
secularism on a social level is less prevalent. Within countries as well,
differing political movements support secularism for varying reasons. Overview.
The term "secularism" was first used by the British writer George Jacob
Holyoake in 1851. Although the term was new, the general notions of freethought
on which it was based had existed throughout history. In particular, early
secular ideas involving the separation of philosophy and religion can be traced
back to Ibn Rushd (Averroes) and the Averroism school of philosophy. Holyoake
invented the term "secularism" to describe his views of promoting a social
order separate from religion, without actively dismissing or criticizing
religious belief. An agnostic himself, Holyoake argued that "Secularism is not
an argument against Christianity, it is one independent of it. It does not
question the pretensions of Christianity; it advances others. Secularism does
not say there is no light or guidance elsewhere, but maintains that there is
light and guidance in secular truth, whose conditions and sanctions exist
independently, and act forever. Secular knowledge is manifestly that kind of
knowledge which is founded in this life, which relates to the conduct of this
life, conduces to the welfare of this life, and is capable of being tested by
the experience of this life." Barry Kosmin of the Institute for the Study of
Secularism in Society and Culture breaks modern secularism into two types: hard
and soft secularism. According to Kosmin, "the hard secularist considers
religious propositions to be epistemologically illegitimate, warranted by
neither reason nor experience." However, in the view of soft secularism, "the
attainment of absolute truth was impossible and therefore skepticism and
tolerance should be the principle and overriding values in the discussion of
science and religion." State secularism. In political terms, secularism is a
movement towards the separation of religion and government (often termed the
separation of church and state). This can refer to reducing ties between a
government and a state religion, replacing laws based on scripture (such as the
Torah and Sharia law) with civil laws, and eliminating discrimination on the
basis of religion. This is said to add to democracy by protecting the rights of
religious minorities. Secularism is often associated with the Age of
Enlightenment in Europe and plays a major role in Western society. The
principles, but not necessarily practices, of separation of church and state in
the United States and "Laïcité" in France draw heavily on secularism. Secular
states also existed in the Islamic world during the Middle Ages (see Islam and
secularism). Due in part to the belief in the separation of church and state,
secularists tend to prefer that politicians make decisions for secular rather
than religious reasons. In this respect, policy decisions pertaining to topics
like abortion, contraception, embryonic stem cell research, same-sex marriage,
and sex education are prominently focused upon by American secularist
organizations such as the Center for Inquiry. Most major religions accept the
primacy of the rules of secular, democratic society but may still seek to
influence political decisions or achieve specific privileges or influence
through church-state agreements such as a concordat. Many Christians support a
secular state, and may acknowledge that the conception has support in Biblical
teachings, particularly the statement of Jesus in the Book of Luke: "Then give
to Caesar what is Caesar's, and to God what is God's.". However, some Christian
fundamentalists (notably in the United States) oppose secularism, often
claiming that there is a "radical secularist" ideology being adopted in current
days and see secularism as a threat to "Christian rights" and national
security. The most significant forces of religious fundamentalism in the
contemporary world are Fundamentalist Christianity and Fundamentalist Islam. At
the same time, one significant stream of secularism has come from religious
minorities who see governmental and political secularism as integral to
preserving equal rights. Some of the well known states that are often
considered "constitutionally secular" are USA, France, India, Mexico South
Korea, and Turkey although none of these nations have identical forms of
governance. Secular society. In studies of religion, modern Democracies are
generally recognized as secular. This is due to the near-complete freedom of
religion (beliefs on religion generally are not subject to legal or social
sanctions), and the lack of authority of religious leaders over political
decisions. Nevertheless, religious beliefs are widely considered a relevant
part of the political discourse in many of these countries. This contrasts with
other Western countries where religious references are generally considered
out-of-place in mainstream politics. Modern sociology has, since Max Weber,
often been preoccupied with the problem of authority in secularized societies
and with secularization as a sociological or historical process. Twentieth-
century scholars whose work has contributed to the understanding of these
matters include Carl L. Becker, Karl Löwith, Hans Blumenberg, M.H. Abrams,
Peter L. Berger, Paul Bénichou and D. L. Munby, among others. Some societies
become increasingly secular as the result of social processes, rather than
through the actions of a dedicated secular movement; this process is known as
secularization. Secular ethics. Holyoake, George J. (1896). "English
Secularism." Chicago: The Open Court Publishing Company. Holyoake held that
secularism and secular ethics should take no interest at all in religious
questions (as they were irrelevant), and was thus to be distinguished from
strong freethought and atheism. In this he disagreed with Charles Bradlaugh,
and the disagreement split the secularist movement between those who argued
that anti-religious movements and activism was not necessary or desirable and
those who argued that it was. Contemporary ethical debate is often described as
"secular", with the work of Derek Parfit and Peter Singer, and even the whole
field of contemporary bioethics, having been described or self-described as
explicitly secular or non-religious. Organizations. Groups such as the National
Secular Society (United Kingdom) and Americans United campaign for secularism
are often supported by Humanists. In 2005, the National Secular Society held
the inaugural "Secularist of the Year" awards ceremony. Its first winner was
Maryam Namazie, of the Worker-Communist Party of Iran. And of the Council of
Ex-Muslims of Britain which aims to break the taboo that comes with renouncing
Islam and to oppose apostasy laws and political Islam. Another secularist
organization is the Secular Coalition for America. The Secular Coalition for
America lobbies and advocates for separation of church and state as well as the
acceptance and inclusion of Secular Americans in American life and public
policy. While Secular Coalition for America is linked to many secular
humanistic organizations and many secular humanists support it, as with the
Secular Society, some non-humanists support it. Local organizations work to
raise the profile of secularism in their communities and tend to include
secularists, freethinkers, atheists, agnostics, and humanists under their
organizational umbrella. Student Organizations, such as the Toronto Secular
Alliance, try to popularize nontheism and secularism on campus. The Secular
Student Alliance is an educational nonprofit that organizes and aids such high
school and college secular student groups. In Turkey, the most prominent and
active secularist organization is Atatürk Thought Association (ADD), which is
credited for organizing the Republic Protests – demonstrations in the four
largest cities in Turkey in 2007, where over 2 million people, mostly women,
defended their concern in and support of secularist principles introduced by
Mustafa Kemal Atatürk. Leicester Secular Society founded in 1851 is the
world's oldest secular society. Further reading. "See also the references list
in the article on secularization"
