Separation of church and state The separation of church and state is the
distance in the relationship between organized religion and the nation state.
The concept of separation has been adopted in a number of countries, to varying
degrees depending on the applicable legal structures and prevalent views toward
the proper role of religion in society. A similar but typically stricter
principle of "laïcité" has been applied in France and Turkey, while some
socially secularized countries such as Norway, Denmark and the United Kingdom
have maintained constitutional recognition of an official state religion. The
concept parallels various other international social and political ideas,
including secularism, disestablishment, religious liberty, and religious
pluralism. Whitman (2009) observes that in many European countries, the state
has, over the centuries, taken over the social roles of the church, leading to
a generally secularized public sphere. The degree of separation varies from
total separation mandated by a constitution, to an official religion with total
prohibition of the practice of any other religion, as in the Maldives. History
of the concept and term. Ancient history. Ancient history is replete with
examples of the mixing and melding of Church and state. Typically a successful
ruler or king would assume various "priestly" titles, in addition to the
"temporal" titles that such a position tended to confer. Some examples of this
certain Church-state mixing and melding are: the execution of Socrates, whereby
Socrates was sentenced to death by the Athenian state for among other things,
"his disrespect for the gods", the claim of many of the ancient Judean kings to
rule with a mandate from Heaven, or the Edict of Thessalonica, whereby Nicene
Christianity was made the state church of the Roman Empire. Late antiquity. One
of the first important contributors to the discussion concerning the proper
relationship between Church and state was St. Augustine, who in The City of
God, Book XIX, Chapter 17, began an examination of the ideal relationship
between the "earthly city" and the "city of God". In this work, Augustine
posited that major points of overlap were to be found between the "earthly
city" and the "city of God", especially as people need to live together and get
along on earth. Thus Augustine held that it was the work of the "temporal city"
to make it possible for a "heavenly city" to be established on earth. Medieval
Europe. For centuries, monarchs ruled by the idea of divine right. Sometimes
this began to be used by a monarch to support the notion that the king ruled
both his own kingdom and Church within its boundaries, a theory known as
caesaropapism. On the other side was the Catholic doctrine that the Pope, as
the Vicar of Christ on earth, should have the ultimate authority over the
Church, and indirectly over the state. Moreover, throughout the Middle Ages the
Pope claimed the right to depose the Catholic kings of Western Europe and tried
to exercise it, sometimes successfully (see the investiture controversy,
below), sometimes not, such as was the case with Henry VIII of England and
Henry III of Navarre. In the West, the issue of the separation of church and
state during the medieval period centered on monarchs who ruled in the secular
sphere but encroached on the Church's rule of the spiritual sphere. This
unresolved contradiction in ultimate control of the Church led to power
struggles and crises of leadership, notably in the Investiture Controversy,
which was resolved in the Concordat of Worms in 1122. By this concordat, the
Emperor renounced the right to invest ecclesiastics with ring and crosier, the
symbols of their spiritual power, and guaranteed election by the canons of
cathedral or abbey and free consecration. Reformation. At the beginning of the
Protestant Reformation, Martin Luther articulated a doctrine of the two
kingdoms. According to James Madison, perhaps one of the most important modern
proponents of the separation of church and state, Luther's doctrine of the two
kingdoms marked the beginning of the modern conception of separation of church
and state. In the 1530s Henry VIII, angered by the Catholic Church's refusal
(Pope Clement VII) to annul his marriage with his wife Catherine of Aragon,
decided to break with the Church and set himself as ruler of the new Church of
England, the Anglican Church, ending the separation that had existed between
Church and State in England. United States. In the United States, the term is
an offshoot of the phrase, "wall of separation between church and state", as
written in Thomas Jefferson's letter to the Danbury Baptist Association in
1802. The original text reads: "Believing with you that religion is a matter
which lies solely between Man & his God, that he owes account to none other for
his faith or his worship, that the legitimate powers of government reach
actions only, & not opinions, I contemplate with sovereign reverence that act
of the whole American people which declared that their legislature should 'make
no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free
exercise thereof,' thus building a wall of separation between Church and
State." Jefferson reflected his frequent speaking theme that the government is
not to interfere with religion. The phrase was quoted by the United States
Supreme Court first in 1878, and then in a series of cases starting in 1947.
The phrase "separation of church and state" itself does not appear in the
United States Constitution. The First Amendment states that "Congress shall
make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free
exercise thereof." The Supreme Court did not consider the question of how this
applied to the states until 1947; when they did, in "Everson v. Board of
Education", the court determined that the first amendment applied to the states
and that a law enabling reimbursement for busing to all schools (including
parochial schools) was constitutional. Prior to 1947, however, these provisions
were not considered to apply at the state level; indeed in the 1870s and 1890s
unsuccessful attempts were made to amend the constitution to accomplish this,
but it was accomplished by judicial decision in 1947. The concept of separating
church and state is often credited to the writings of English philosopher John
Locke (1632–1704). According to his principle of the social contract, Locke
argued that the government lacked authority in the realm of individual
conscience, as this was something rational people could not cede to the
government for it or others to control. For Locke, this created a natural right
in the liberty of conscience, which he argued must therefore remain protected
from any government authority. These views on religious tolerance and the
importance of individual conscience, along with his social contract, became
particularly influential in the American colonies and the drafting of the
United States Constitution. The concept was implicit in the flight of Roger
Williams from religious oppression in the Massachusetts Bay Colony to found the
Colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations on the principle of state
neutrality in matters of faith. The Treaty of Tripoli. In 1797, the United
States Senate ratified a treaty with Tripoli that stated in Article 11:
According to Frank Lambert, Professor of History at Purdue University, the
assurances in Article 11 were "intended to allay the fears of the Muslim state
by insisting that religion would not govern how the treaty was interpreted and
enforced. President John Adams and the Senate made clear that the pact was
between two sovereign states, not between two religious powers." Supporters of
the separation of church and state argue that this treaty, which was ratified
by the Senate, confirms that the government of the United States was
specifically intended to be religiously neutral. The treaty was submitted by
President Adams and unanimously ratified by the Senate. Use of the phrase. The
phrase "separation of church and state" is derived from a letter written by
President Thomas Jefferson in 1802 to Baptists from Danbury, Connecticut, and
published in a Massachusetts newspaper soon thereafter. In that letter,
referencing the First Amendment to the United States Constitution, Jefferson
writes: Another early user of the term was James Madison, the principal drafter
of the United States Bill of Rights. In a 1789 debate in the House of
Representatives regarding the draft of the First Amendment, the following was
said: Madison contended "Because if Religion be exempt from the authority of
the Society at large, still less can it be subject to that of the Legislative
Body." Several years later he wrote of "total separation of the church from the
state." "Strongly guarded as is the separation between Religion & Govt in the
Constitution of the United States", Madison wrote, and he declared, "practical
distinction between Religion and Civil Government is essential to the purity of
both, and as guaranteed by the Constitution of the United States." In a letter
to Edward Livingston Madison further expanded, "We are teaching the world the
great truth that Govts. do better without Kings & Nobles than with them. The
merit will be doubled by the other lesson that Religion flourishes in greater
purity, without than with the aid of Govt." This attitude is further reflected
in the Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom, originally authored by Jefferson
and championed by Madison, and guaranteeing that no one may be compelled to
finance any religion or denomination. Under the United States Constitution, the
treatment of religion by the government is broken into two clauses: the
establishment clause and the free exercise clause. Both are discussed in regard
to whether certain state actions would amount to an impermissible government
establishment of religion. The phrase was also mentioned in an eloquent letter
written by President John Tyler on July 10, 1843. During the 1960 presidential
campaign the potential influence of the Catholic Church on John F. Kennedy's
presidency was raised. If elected, it would be the first time that a Catholic
would occupy the highest office in the United States. John F. Kennedy, in his
on 12 September 1960, addressed the question directly, saying, The United
States Supreme Court has referenced the separation of church and state metaphor
more than 25 times, though not always fully embracing the principle. In
"Reynolds", the Court denied the free exercise claims of Mormons in the Utah
territory who claimed polygamy was an aspect of their religious freedom. The
Court used the phrase again by Justice Hugo Black in 1947 in "Everson". The
term has been used and defended heavily by the Court, but is not unanimously
held. In a minority opinion in Wallace v. Jaffree, Justice Rehnquist presented
the view that the establishment clause was intended to protect local
establishments of religion from federal interference. Rehnquist made numerous
citations of cases that rebutted the idea of a total wall of separation between
Church and State. A result of such reasoning was Supreme Court support for
government payments to faith-based community projects. Justice Scalia has
criticized the metaphor as a bulldozer removing religion from American public
life. In various countries. Countries have varying degrees of separation
between government and religious institutions. Since the 1780s a number of
countries have set up explicit barriers between church and state. The degree of
actual separation between government and religion or religious institutions
varies widely. In some countries the two institutions remain heavily
interconnected. There are new conflicts in the post-Communist world. The many
variations on separation can be seen in some countries with high degrees of
religious freedom and tolerance combined with strongly secular political
cultures which have still maintained state churches or financial ties with
certain religious organizations into the 21st century. In England, there is a
constitutionally established state religion but other faiths are tolerated. The
British monarch is the Supreme Governor of the Church of England, and 26
bishops (Lords Spiritual) sit in the upper house of government, the House of
Lords. In other kingdoms, the head of government or head of state or other
high-ranking official figures may be legally required to be a member of a given
faith. Powers to appoint high-ranking members of the state churches are also
often still vested in the worldly governments. These powers may be slightly
anachronistic or superficial, however, and disguise the true level of religious
freedom the nation possesses. In the case of Andorra there are two heads of
state, neither of them native Andorrans. One is the Roman Catholic Bishop of
Seu d'Urgell, a town located in Catalunya/Spain. He has the title of
Episcopalian Coprince (the other Coprince being the French Head of State).
Coprinces enjoy political power in terms of law ratification and constitutional
court designation, among others. Australia. The Constitution of Australia
prevents the Commonwealth from establishing any religion or requiring a
religious test for any office:— The language is derived from the United
States' constitution, but has been altered. Following the usual practice of the
High Court, it has been interpreted far more narrowly than the equivalent US
sections and no law has ever been struck down for contravening the section.
Today, the Commonwealth Government provides broad-based funding to religious
schools and also funds school chaplains for public and private schools. All
Australian parliaments are opened with a Christian prayer, and the preamble to
the Australian Constitution refers to a "humblrel[iance on the blessing of
Almighty God." Although the Australian monarch is Queen Elizabeth II, also
British monarch and Governor of the Church of England, her Australian title is
unrelated to her religious office and she has no role in the Anglican Church of
Australia. The prohibition against religious tests has allowed former Anglican
Archbishop of Brisbane Peter Hollingworth to be appointed Governor-General, the
highest domestic constitutional officer; however, this was criticized. Despite
inclusion in the "States" chapter, Section 116 does not apply to states because
of changes during drafting, and they are free to establish their own religions.
Although no state has ever introduced a state church (NSW restricted religious
groups during the early colonial period), the legal body corresponding to many
religious organisations is established by state legislation. There have been
two referenda to extend Section 116 to states, but both failed. In each case
the changes were grouped with other changes and voters did not have the
opportunity to expressly accept only one change. Most states permit broad
exemptions to religious groups from anti-discrimination legislation; for
example, the NSW act allowing same-sex couples to adopt permits religious
adoption agencies to refuse them. The current situation, described as a
"principle of state neutrality" rather than "separation of church and state",
has been criticised by both secularists and religious groups. On the one hand,
secularists have argued that government neutrality to religions leads to a
"flawed democracM. (2005). [http://www.hsnsw.asn.au/MaxWallace.html Is there a
separation of church and state in Australia and New Zealand? "Australian
Humanist", "77". Retrieved 2010-10-10. or even a "pluralistic theocracy" as the
government cannot be neutral towards the religion of people who do not have
one. On the other hand, religious groups and others have been concerned that
state governments are restricting them from exercising their religion by
preventing them from criticising other groups and forcing them to do
unconscionable acts. Brazil. Brazil was a colony of the Portuguese Empire from
1500 until the nation's independence from Portugal, in 1822, during which time
Roman Catholicism was the official state religion. With the rise of the Empire
of Brazil, although Catholicism retained its status as the official creed,
subsidized by the state, other religions were allowed to flourish, as the 1824
Constitution secured religious freedom. The fall of the Empire, in 1889, gave
way to a Republican regime, and a Constitution was enacted in 1891, which
severed the ties between church and state; Republican ideologues such as
Benjamin Constant and Ruy Barbosa were influenced by laïcité in France and
the United States. The 1891 Constitutional separation of Church and State has
been maintained ever since. The current Constitution of Brazil, in force since
1988, ensures the right to religious freedom, bans the establishment of state
churches and any relationship of "dependence or alliance" of officials with
religious leaders, except for "collaboration in the public interest, defined by
law". France. Laïcité, a particular product of French history and philosophy,
was formalized in the 1905 law providing for the separation of church and
state, that is, the separation of religion from political power. But the
concept of removing religion to the private space as opposed to the public
space of politics and the civil sphere is currently fiercely contested in
France, driven, especially, by reactions to various manifestations of Islam,
such as wearing the headscarf in schools. The French version of separation is
called laïcité. This model of a secularist state protects the religious
institutions from some types of state interference, but with public religious
expression also to some extent limited. This aims to protect the public power
from the influences of religious institutions, especially in public office.
Religious views which contain no idea of public responsibility, or which
consider religious opinion irrelevant to politics, are less impinged upon by
this type of secularization of public discourse. Former President Nicolas
Sarkozy has criticised "negative laicite" (as in Spain) and wants to develop a
"positive laicite" that recognizes the contribution of faith to French culture,
history and society, allows for faith in the public discourse and for
government subsidies for faith-based groups. Sarkozy sees France's main
religions as positive contributions to French society. He was elected on a
platform proposing a modernisation of the Republic's century-old principle of
laicite. He visited the Pope in December 2007 and publicly acknowledged
France's Christian roots, while highlighting the importance of freedom of
thought, hinting that faith should come back into the public sphere. Japan.
Shinto was closely associated with the state and the Emperor, especially during
the time between the Meiji Restoration and the end of World War II. Under the
American military occupation (1945–52) separation of religion and state
became a major priority. People's Republic of China. China, during the era of
the Han Dynasty, had established Confucianism as the official state ideology
over that of Legalism of the preceding Qin Dynasty over two millennium ago. In
post-1949 modern-day China, owing to such historic experiences as the Taiping
Rebellion, the Chinese Communist Party had no diplomatic relations with the
Vatican for over half a century, and maintained separation of the church from
state affairs, and although the Chinese government's methods are disputed by
the Vatican, Pope Benedict had accepted the ordination of a bishop who was pre-
selected by the government for the Chinese Patriotic Catholic Association in
2007, however a new ordination of a Catholic bishop in November 2010 according
to BBC News, has threatened to "damage ties" between China and the Vatican.
Mexico. The issue of the role of the Catholic Church in Mexico has been highly
divisive since the 1820s. Its large land holdings were especially a point of
contention. Mexico was guided toward what was proclaimed a separation of church
and state by Benito Juárez who, in 1859, attempted to eliminate the role of
the Roman Catholic Church in the nation by appropriating its land and
prerogatives. In 1859 the Ley Lerdo was issued - purportedly separating church
and state, but actually involving state intervention in Church matters by
abolishing monastic orders, and nationalizing church property. In 1926, after
several years of the revolutionary war and insecurity, President Plutarco
Elías Calles, an atheist, enacted the Calles Law, which eradicated all the
personal property of the churches, closed churches that were not registered
with the State, and prohibited clerics from holding a public office. The law
was unpopular; and several protesters from rural areas, fought against federal
troops in what became known as the Cristero War. After the war's end in 1929,
President Emilio Portes Gil upheld a previous truce where the law would remain
enacted, but not enforced, in exchange for the hostilities to end. Ever since,
the Catholic Church has remained active through the National Action Party
(Mexico). The party gained a major foothold in 2000 when President Vicente Fox
was elected, ending 70 years of unbroken rule from the Institutional
Revolutionary Party. Norway. In Norway, the King is also the leader of the
state church, and the 12th article of the Constitution of Norway requires more
than half of the members of the Norwegian Council of State to be members of the
state church. Yet, the second article guarantees freedom of religion, while
also stating that Evangelical Lutheranism is the official state religion. On
May 15. 2012 the Norwegian Parliament informed the public that they are going
to abolish the state church when the new constitutional amendments are passed
on May 21, 2012. This will officially separate the Church of Norway from the
state, however little will change except more freedom to the church. Germany.
The German constitution guarantees freedom of religion, but there is not a
complete separation of church and state in Germany. Officially recognized
churches operate as "Körperschaft des öffentlichen Rechts" (corporations of
public, as opposed to private law). For recognized religious communities, some
taxes are collected by the state; this is at the request of the religious
community and a fee is charged for the service. Religious instruction is a
normal school subject in Germany. The German State understands itself as
neutral in matters of religious beliefs, so no teacher can be forced to teach
religion. But on the other hand, all who do teach religious instruction need an
official permission by their religious community. The treaties with the Holy
See are referred to as concordats. They are the legal framework for cooperation
between the Roman Catholic Church and the German State. Philippines. In Article
2 "Declaration of Principles and State Policies", Section VI, the 1987
Constitution of the Philippines repeats the phrase from the 1973 constitution,
"The separation of Church and State shall be inviolable." In practise, the
Roman Catholic Church in the Philippines still exerts considerable influence on
Filipino politics and public opinion. This arrangement is a vestige of the
Spanish-era "frialocracy", a derisive local term referring to how Catholic
clergymen once held varying degrees of temporal power and control over the
secular economy. Recent examples of the Church's continued presence in public
life are the 1986 People Power Revolution and the current debate over the
Reproductive Health Bill. Spain. In Spain, Commentators have posited that the
form of church-state separation enacted in France in 1905 and found in the
Spanish Constitution of 1931 are of a "hostile" variety, noting that the
hostility of the state toward the church was a cause of the breakdown of
democracy and the onset of the Spanish Civil War. Following the end of the war,
the Catholic Church regained an officially sanctioned, predominant position
under the Franco dictatorship. Religious freedom was guaranteed only in 1966,
nine years before the end of the regime. Sweden. The Church of Sweden was
established by Gustav I of Sweden and within the half century following his
death was established as a Lutheran church with excessive power in Swedish
society, itself under the control of the state apparatus. Freedom of religion
was seriously achieved under Gustav III's dictatorship, with the state church
separated from the state as from 1 January 2000. The reform was pushed through
by the cabinet of Göran Persson. United Kingdom. The Church of England
(Anglican church) is still nominally an established church, and the British
monarch is the titular head of the Anglican church, and cannot be a Catholic.
They are unable to marry a Catholic as well, but there are proposals to change
this. In England, Church appointments are Crown appointments, the Church
carries out important state functions such as coronations, and a number of high
Church officials have seats in the House of Lords (26 out of a total of 789
members), and are known as the Lords Spiritual as opposed to the Lords
Temporal. The links between church and state in the UK are, nowadays, mostly a
formality and the governance of the UK is relatively secular, although the
Lords Spiritual have a significant influence when they vote as a bloc on
certain issues, notably abortion and assisted dying. The Church of England
however holds no jurisdiction in Scotland. The Church of Scotland is the
largest religious denomination in Scotland, however, unlike the Church of
England it is Presbyterian and separate from the state, with the Sovereign
holding no formal role. The Church of Ireland was disestablished as early as
1871; the Church in Wales was disestablished in 1920. As there is no written
constitution, there is no constitutional principle of freedom of religious
exercise as there is in other countries, such as Germany and the United States.
However, under various laws, such as the Human Rights Act 1998 and the Equality
Act 2010, religious groups are free to associate, worship, promote and publish
their views alongside the established churches. Religious views. Beyond law and
philosophy, some Christians refuse to vote, carry arms, or participate in civil
government in any way, often leading to their persecution, as happened to
Anabaptists, their descendants including the Amish and Mennonites, Quakers,
and, in the 20th Century, Jehovah's Witnesses in many countries, believing by
not participating they are closer to the Kingdom of God, since "Jesus answered
(Pilate), 'My kingdom is not of this world: if my kingdom were of this world,
then would my servants fight (to defend him).' " - John 18:36. For them, the
term "Christian nation" cannot be a valid governmental position, leaving only
Christian people, possibly in Christian communities, beyond which are the
"things which are Caesar's" - . Ahmadiyya. According to the Ahmadiyya Muslim
Community's understanding of Islam, Islamic principles state that the politics
of government should be separate from the doctrine of religion. Special
preference should not be given to a Muslim over a non-Muslim. Catholicism.
Murray, John Courtney and J. Leon Hooper, Religious liberty: Catholic struggles
with pluralism, p. 213-214, Westminster John Knox Press, 1993 The Catholic
Church takes views on political issues, and tries to influence legislation
(affecting all the residents of a country, not just Catholics) on matters it
considers relevant. For example, the Catholic bishops in the United States
adopted a plan in the 1970s calling for efforts aimed at a constitutional
amendment providing "protection for the unborn child to the maximum degree
possible". Friendly and hostile separation. Scholars have distinguished between
what can be called "friendly" and "hostile" separations of church and state.
The friendly type limits the interference of the church in matters of the state
but also limits the interference of the state in church matters. The hostile
variety, by contrast, seeks to confine religion purely to the home or church
and limits religious education, religious rites of passage and public displays
of faith. The hostile model of secularism arose with the French Revolution and
is typified in the Mexican Revolution, its resulting Constitution and the
Spanish Constitution of 1931. The hostile model exhibited during these events
can be seen as approaching the type of political religion seen in totalitarian
states. The French separation of 1905 and the Spanish separation of 1931 have
been characterized as the two most hostile of the twentieth century, although
the current schemes in both countries are considered generally friendly.
France's President Nicolas Sarkozy at the beginning of his term, however,
considered the current scheme a "negative laicite" and wanted to develop a
"positive laicite" more open to religion. The concerns of the state toward
religion have been seen by some as one cause of the civil war in Spain and
Mexico. The French philosopher and Universal Declaration of Human Rights
drafter Jacques Maritain noted the distinction between the models found in
France and in the mid-twentieth century United States. He considered the US
model of that time to be more amicable because it had both "sharp distinction
and actual cooperation" between church and state, what he called "an historical
treasure" and admonished the United States, "Please to God that you keep it
carefully, and do not let your concept of separation veer round to the European
one." Alexis de Tocqueville, another French observer tended to make the same
distinction, "In the U.S., from the beginning, politics and religion were in
accord, and they have not ceased to be so since."
