Separatism Separatism is the advocacy of a state of cultural, ethnic, tribal,
religious, racial, governmental or gender separation from the larger group.
While it often refers to full political secession, separatist groups may seek
nothing more than greater autonomy. Some groups refer to their organizing as
independence, self-determination, partition or decolonization movements instead
of, or in addition to, autonomist, separatist or secession movements. While
some critics may equate separatism and religious segregation, racial
segregation or sexual segregation, separatists argue that separation by choice
is not the same as government-enforced segregation and may serve useful
purposes. Governmental responses. Some governments suppress any separatist
movement in their own country, but support separatism in other countries. Types
of separatist groups. Separatist groups practice a form of identity politics -
"political activity and theorizing founded in the shared experiences of
injustice of members of certain social groups." Such groups believe attempts at
integration with dominant groups compromise their identity and ability to
pursue greater self-determination. However, economic and political factors
usually are critical in creating strong separatist movements as opposed to less
ambitious identity movements. "See more complete lists of historical and active
autonomist and secessionist movements, as well as a list of unrecognized
countries." Religious. Religious separatist groups and sects want to withdraw
from some larger religious groups and/or believe they should interact primarily
with co-religionists. Racial. Some groups seek to separate from others along
racialist lines. They oppose inter-marriage with other races and seek separate
schools, businesses, churches and other institutions or even separate
societies, territories and governments. Gender. Separatist feminism is women's
choosing to separate from ostensibly male-defined, male-dominated institutions,
relationships, roles and activities. Lesbian separatism advocates lesbianism as
the logical result of feminism. Some separatist feminists and lesbian
separatists have chosen to live apart in intentional community, cooperatives,
and on land trusts. "Gay" separatism including both lesbians and gay men holds
they should form a community distinct and separate from other groups.
