Settler colonialism Settler colonialism is a specific colonial formation
whereby foreign family units move into a region and reproduce. Land is thus the
key resource in settler colonies, whereas natural (e.g. gold, cotton, oil) and
human (e.g. labour, existing trade networks, convertible souls) resources are
the main motivation behind other forms of colonialism. Normal colonialism
typically ends, whereas settler colonialism lasts forever, except in the rare
event of complete evacuation ("e.g.", the Lost Colony of Roanoke) or settler
decolonization. The historian of race and settler colonialism Patrick Wolfe
writes that "settler colonialism destroys to replace" and insists that
"invasion", in settler colonial contexts, is "a structure, not an event". In
the ancient world. Settler colonialism has occurred extensively throughout
human history, including in the ancient world. Hellenes. Greek settlers cloned
their city-states through much of the coastlines of the Mediterranean. Under
the Macedonian Empire, the Hellenistic pattern of settler colonies extended
deep into Asia. However, many of the people living in these cities were non-
ethnic Greeks who had adopted the dominant Ancient Greek language and its
concomitant Hellenistic civilization. Rome. The Roman Republic and later the
Roman Empire commonly established settler colonies in newly conquered regions.
The colonists in these colonies were often veterans of the Roman army, who
received agricultural land to develop. These agricultural communities provided
bastions of loyal citizens in often hostile areas of the Empire, and often
accelerated the process of Romanisation among the nearby conquered peoples. For
examples of such colonies: near the city of Damascus in present-day Syria, the
contemporary settlements of Mezze and Deraya can trace their origins back to
villages opened for settlement by the Romans during the third century CE.
Philip the Arab, the Roman Emperor from 244 to 249 designated this area around
Damascus a "colonia", and encouraged settlement by veterans of the VI Ferrata
legion, as commemorated by coins minted in the city around this time. In early
modern and modern times. During the early modern period, some European nation-
states and their agents adopted policies of colonialism, competing with each
other to establish colonies outside of Europe, at first in the Americas, and
later in Asia, Africa, and Oceania. Settler colonialism in Oceania. Europeans
came and settled in Australia, in many cases displacing Indigenous Australians.
The Indigenous Australian population, estimated at about 350,000 at the time of
European settlement, declined steeply for 150 years following settlement from
1788, mainly because of infectious disease combined with forced re-settlement
and cultural disintegration. The removal of children, that historians and
Indigenous Australians have portrayed as genocide, may have made a contribution
to the decline in the indigenous population. Such interpretations of Aboriginal
history are disputed by some, such as Keith Windshuttle, as being exaggerated
or fabricated for political or ideological reasons. This debate is known within
Australia as the History Wars. Following the 1967 referendum, the Federal
government gained the power to implement policies and make laws with respect to
Aborigines. Traditional ownership of land — native title — in Australia
first gained legal recognition in 1992, when the High Court case "Mabo v
Queensland (No 2)" overturned the notion of Australia as "terra nullius" at the
time of European occupation. Settler colonialism in Asia. Jews have lived in
Palestine continuously since ancient times, particularly in the Four Holy
Cities: Jerusalem, Safed, Tiberias and Hebron. Nevertheless, founders of
Zionism such as Theodore Herzl and Ahad Ha'am envisaged colonising from the
outset. In 1967 the French historian Maxime Rodinson wrote an article later
translated and published in English as "Israel: A Colonial Settler-State?"
Lorenzo Veracini treats Israel's colonial nature as a given and writes that
Jewish settlers could expel the British in 1948 only because they had their own
colonial relationships inside and outside Israel's new borders. Veracini
believes the possibility of an Israeli disengagement is always latent and this
relationship could be severed, through an "accommodation of a Palestinian
Israeli autonomy within the institutions of the Israeli state" (Veracini 2006)
Other scholars, such as Daiva Stasiulis and Nira Yuval-Davis, and Joseph Massad
in the "Post Colonial Colony: time, space and bodies in Palestine/ Israel in
the persistence of the Palestinian Question". have included Israel in their
global analysis of settler societies. Some Palestinians express similar
opinions - writer and sociologist Jamil Hilal, member of the Palestinian
National Council lives in what he describes as "the heavily-colonised West
Bank", and drew parallels in 1976 between South African and Israeli settler
colonialism, noting that "as in Southern Africa, stretches of land were
acquired by the Zionist settlers [...] and their Arab tenants thrown out".
Hilal also argues that the defence industries of the two nations collaborated
against the sanctions on South Africa, especially on their respective nuclear
programs in the 1980s. Former Palestinian Foreign Minister Dr. Nasser al-Qidwa
opposes the policy of Israeli settlements and has described those efforts as
colonialism. Ambassador Rastam Mohd Isa, former permanent representative of
Malaysia to the United Nations, speaking on behalf of the non-aligned movement
(NAM) in 2003 expressed grave concern about "the continuing and escalating
Israeli military campaign ... excessive and indiscriminate use of force, and
"continuing settler colonial activities""
