Sexual Freedom League The Sexual Freedom League was an organization founded in
1963 in New York City by Jefferson Poland and Leo Koch. It existed to promote
and conduct sexual activity among its members and to agitate for political
reform, especially for the repeal of laws against abortion and censorship, and
had many female leaders. History. Formation. When Jefferson Poland moved to the
San Francisco Bay Area, he started a League there as well, specifically at the
University of California, Berkeley in 1966. Although Poland founded the League,
he did not try to establish it as a conventional organization with membership
lists, dues and meetings. Instead, he went around establishing various Leagues
and allowing others to run them. The League first made national news in August,
1965 with the "Nude Wade-in" led by Poland, 23, Ina Saslow, 21, and Shirley
Einseidel, 21, at Aquatic Park, a public beach in San Francisco. The S.F.L. was
featured in an article in "Time" magazine for March 11, 1966, which attracted
thousands of curiosity seekers and a few active participants. In early 1966
Poland turned over the East Bay League to Richard Thorne, who proceeded to
organize nude parties, which were thinly disguised sex orgies. Thorne fled to
Mexico in the Summer of 1966 and later changed his name to Ohm and started a
religion by that name. Split. Following Thorne's departure, a rift developed.
One faction wanted members to have open meetings and discussions about sex but
not actually to engage in sexual relations. The other wanted to continue the
tradition of orgies. The non-sex branch was headed by Linda Lindvall and the
pro-sex branch by Sam Sloan, a student at the University of California at
Berkeley. Sloan's faction was recognized by Sproul Hall as an official,
registered on-campus student organization under the modified name "Campus
Sexual Rights Forum," because the Dean of Students would not agree to register
it under the name "Sexual Freedom League." The Sloan group set up an S.F.L.
information table on campus and distributed literature, held rallies and sold
buttons to finance its activities on campus, while holding orgies (mostly
involving Berkeley students) off campus. It was featured in articles in "Time",
"Playboy", and "Sexology" magazines as well as in numerous articles in the "San
Francisco Chronicle", the "Berkeley Gazette", and the "Berkeley Barb". The
other faction, the East Bay S.F.L., established headquarters in Oakland.
Instead of holding nude parties it formed "circles," including the "Horny Men's
Circle" and the "Wanton Women's Circle." Even so, the Coordinator (Chairman) of
these circles, Lisa Lindvall, also participated in the sex orgies of the campus
group. By December, 1966, the East Bay Sexual Freedom League, forced by
competition from Sam Sloan's Campus Sexual Freedom League and also by the
influence of an article in the September "Back to School" issue of Playboy
which Sloan helped to write, started holding nude parties and sex orgies again.
In January 1967, 24-year-old Lindvall suddenly died of cystic fibrosis. Dutch
immigrant Alida Reyenga took over as Coordinator, but she often complained that
she spent so much time working for the Sexual Freedom League that she had no
time left for sex. In the middle of 1967, all of the files and membership
records of the East Bay League were appropriated in a putsch by Tom Palmer and
Virginia Miller, who formed it as a corporation, kicked out the discussion
circles leaving only the nude parties. They also turned the East Bay League
into a wife swapping or swinging club, which was an anathema to serious and
dedicated freedom leaguers. Later, Tom Palmer committed suicide and another
person seized the membership records and tried to turn the East Bay League into
a for-profit business. Leaving the East Bay. The Campus Sexual Freedom League
disappeared when Sloan left town due to an arrest in April 1967. The last of
its 28 nude parties took place on Christmas Eve of that year. By then the East
Bay League had also folded and Alida Reyenga had moved to Los Angeles, where
she took up Scientology. While the East Bay versions were dying out, other
chapters sprouted up all over California, and the San Francisco Sexual Freedom
League emerged at the forefront. It was at first headed by Margo St. James, who
claimed to be a "former prostitute" and participated in social activism while
she organized sex orgies, then taken over by Frank and Margo Rila. Frank, who
edited the Sexual Freedom newspaper, eventually committed suicide. Margo St.
James ran for San Francisco Board of Supervisors many times but all without
success. She has often been criticized by anti-sex feminists such as Dorchen
Leidholdt.
