Shadow Cabinet The Shadow Cabinet is a senior group of opposition spokespeople
in the Westminster system of government who together under the leadership of
the Leader of the Opposition form an alternative cabinet to the government's,
whose members "shadow" or mark each individual member of the Cabinet. Members
of a shadow cabinet are often but not always appointed to a Cabinet post if and
when their party gets into government. It is the Shadow Cabinet's
responsibility to pass criticism on the current government and its respective
legislation, as well as offering alternative policies. Cultural applications.
In the United Kingdom and Canada the major opposition party and specifically
its shadow cabinet is called "His" or "Her Majesty's Loyal Opposition". The
adjective "loyal" is used because, while the role of the opposition is to
oppose Her Majesty's Government, it does not dispute the sovereign's right to
the throne and therefore the legitimacy of the government. However in other
countries that use the Westminster system (for example, New Zealand), the
opposition is known simply as "The Parliamentary Opposition" instead of shadow.
Some parliamentary parties, notably the Australian Labor Party, elect all the
members of their shadow cabinets in a party room ballot, with the Leader of the
Opposition then allocating portfolios to the Shadow Ministers. In other
parliamentary parties, the membership and composition of the Shadow Cabinet is
generally determined solely by the Leader of the Opposition. In most countries,
a member of the shadow cabinet is referred to as a Shadow Minister. In Canada,
however, the term Opposition Critics is more usual. In the United Kingdom's
House of Lords, the term "spokesperson" is used instead of "shadow". In many
jurisdictions, third parties (which are neither participant in the government
or in the official opposition) may also form their own parliamentary front
benches of critics; however, parliamentary standing orders on the right for
parties to speak often dictate that the right to speak can only be granted to a
party or group if a minimum number of members can be recorded by the party. In
Ireland, for example, technical groups are often formed by third parties and
independent TDs in the Dáil Éireann in order to increase the members' right
to speak against larger parties which can afford the right to speak as Front
Benches in Government or Opposition.
