Signalling (economics) In economics, more precisely in contract theory,
signalling (or signaling: "see American and British English differences") is
the idea that one party (termed the "agent") credibly conveys some information
about itself to another party (the "principal"). For example, in Michael
Spence's job-market signalling model, (potential) employees send a signal about
their ability level to the employer by acquiring certain education credentials.
The informational value of the credential comes from the fact that the employer
assumes it is positively correlated with having greater ability. Introductory
questions. Signalling took root in the idea of asymmetric information (a
deviation from perfect information), which says that in some economic
transactions, inequalities in access to information upset the normal market for
the exchange of goods and services. In his seminal 1973 article, Michael Spence
proposed that two parties could get around the problem of asymmetric
information by having one party send a signal that would reveal some piece of
relevant information to the other party. That party would then interpret the
signal and adjust her purchasing behaviour accordingly — usually by offering
a higher price than if she had not received the signal. There are, of course,
many problems that these parties would immediately run into. A basic job-market
signalling model. In the job market, potential employees seek to sell their
services to employers for some wage, or price. Generally, employers are willing
to pay higher wages to employ better workers. While the individual may know his
or her own level of ability, the hiring firm is not (usually) able to observe
such an intangible trait — thus there is an asymmetry of information between
the two parties. Education credentials can be used as a signal to the firm,
indicating a certain level of ability that the individual may possess; thereby
narrowing the informational gap. This is beneficial to both parties as long as
the signal indicates a desirable attribute — a signal such as a criminal
record may not be so desirable. Assumptions and groundwork. Spence began his
1973 model with a hypothetical example. Suppose that there are two types of
employees — good and bad — and that employers are willing to pay a higher
wage to the good type than the bad type. Spence assumes that for employers,
there's no real way to tell in advance which employees will be of the good or
bad type. Bad employees aren't upset about this, because they get a free ride
from the hard work of the good employees. But good employees know that they
deserve to be paid more for their higher productivity, so they desire to invest
in the signal — in this case, some amount of education. Spence assumes that
education does not increase the productivity of an individual. But he does make
one key assumption: "good-type employees pay less for one unit of education
than bad-type employees". The cost he refers to is not necessarily the cost of
tuition and living expenses, sometimes called out of pocket expenses, as one
could make the argument that higher ability persons tend to enroll in "better"
(i.e. more expensive) institutions. Rather, the cost Spence is referring to is
the opportunity cost. This is a combination of 'costs', monetary and otherwise,
including psychological, time, effort and so on. Of key importance to the value
of the signal is the differing cost structure between "good" and "bad" workers.
The cost of obtaining identical credentials is strictly lower for the "good"
employee than it is for the "bad" employee. The differing cost structure need
not preclude "bad" workers from obtaining the credential. All that is necessary
for the signal to have value (informational or otherwise) is that the group
with the signal is positively correlated with the previously unobservable group
of "good" workers. In general, the degree to which a signal is thought to be
correlated to unknown or unobservable attributes is directly related to its
value. The result. Spence discovered that even if education did not contribute
anything to an employee's productivity, it could still have value to both the
employer and employee. If the appropriate cost/benefit structure exists (or is
created), "good" employees will buy more education in order to signal their
higher productivity. The increase in wages associated with obtaining a higher
credential is sometimes referred to as the Sheepskin Effect, since "sheepskin"
informally denotes a diploma. It is important to note that this is not the same
as the returns from an additional year of education. The "sheepskin" effect is
actually the wage increase above what would normally be attributed to the extra
year of education. This can be observed empirically in the wage differences
between 'drop-outs' vs. 'completers' with an equal number of years of
education. It is also important that one does not equate the fact that higher
wages are paid to more educated individuals entirely to signalling or the
'sheepskin' effects. In reality education serves many different purposes to
individuals and society as a whole. Only when all of these aspects, as well as
all the many factors affecting wages, are controlled for, does the effect of
the "sheepskin" approach its true value. Empirical studies of signalling
indicate it as a statistically significant determinant of wages, however it is
one of a host of other attributes — age, sex, and geography are examples of
other important factors. One of the consequences of the existence of a pure
signalling value to education is that public funding of education, especially
higher education, is questioned. The debate is not so much about whether there
should be any public funding at all; but what the correct level of funding
should be. In purely economic terms, the optimal level of public funding would
equal the total public benefits from the educated population — the private
value of the signal would be excluded. Signalling and IPOs. Leland and Pyle
(1977) analyse the role of signals within the process of IPO. The authors show
how companies with good future perspectives and higher possibilities of success
("good companies") should always send clear signals to the market when going
public (e.g. the owner should keep control of a significant percentage of the
company). To be reliable, the signal must be too costly to be imitated by "bad
companies". If no signal is sent to the market, asymmetric information will
result in adverse selection in the IPO market.
