Singer–Prebisch thesis The Singer–Prebisch thesis (also Prebisch–Singer
thesis, PST, or Prebisch–Singer hypothesis) postulates that terms of trade,
between primary products and manufactured goods, deteriorate in time. In 1950,
the economists Raúl Prebisch and Hans Singer independently developed the
thesis that countries that export commodities (developing countries) in time
would import fewer manufactured goods relative to a given level of exports.
However, during the 2000s commodities boom, the terms of trade of most
developing countries improved while east Asia (with much of its export to be
manufactured goods) has deteriorated terms of trade. Thesis. Singer and
Prebisch examined data over a long period of time suggesting that the terms of
trade for primary commodity exporters did have a tendency to decline. A common
explanation for the phenomenon is the observation that the income elasticity of
demand for manufactured goods is greater than that for primary products -
especially food. Therefore, as incomes rise, the demand for manufactured goods
increases more rapidly than demand for primary products. The theory implies
that it is the very structure of the market which is responsible for the
existence of inequality in the world system. This provides an interesting twist
on Wallerstein's neo-Marxist interpretation of the international order which
faults differences in power relations between 'core' and 'periphery' states as
the chief cause for economic and political inequality (However, the Singer-
Prebisch thesis also works with different bargaining positions of labour in
developed and developing countries). As a result, the Singer-Prebisch Thesis
enjoyed a high degree of popularity in the 1960s and 1970s with neo-marxist
developmental Economists and provided a justification for import substitution
industrializing (ISI) policies and even an expansion of the role of the
commodity futures exchange as a tool for development. Properly understood, the
Singer-Prebisch thesis is an observation, not a theory. Singer and Prebisch
noticed a similar statistical pattern in long-run historical data on relative
prices, but such regularity is consistent with a number of different
explanations and policy stances. Later in his highly influential career,
Prebisch argued that, due to the declining terms of trade primary producers
face, developing countries should strive to diversify their economies and
lessen dependence on primary commodity exports by developing their
manufacturing industry. Few economists today would agree that an import-
substitution stance is the correct response to declining terms of trade. The
Singer-Prebisch thesis has lost some of its relevance in the last 30 years, as
exports of simple manufactures have overtaken exports of primary commodities in
most developing countries outside of Africa. For this reason, much of the
recent research inspired by the Singer-Prebisch thesis focuses less on the
relative prices of primary products and manufactured goods, and more on the
relative prices of simple manufactures produced by developing countries and
complex manufactures produced by advanced economies. "One indication of this is
that the PST is now incorporated, both implicitly and explicitly, in the advice
given by the Bretton Woods Institutions to developing countries. They are
warned to be prudent even when export prices are temporarily favourable and to
guard against currency overvaluation and Dutch Disease, with all the
unfavourable impact on the rest of the economy and all the dangers of
macroeconomic instability which a sudden boom in a major export sector could
imply. They are warned to remember that the outlook for commodity prices is not
favourable and that windfalls will tend to be temporary, with the subsequent
relapse likely to be greater than the temporary windfall. This is exactly the
warning which the PST would give." History. Raul Prebisch's analysis of the
deterioration of the terms of trade were first introduced in his paper "The
Economic Development of Latin America" (1950; orig. in Spanish 1949). Prebisch
was asked by the executive secretary of the United Nations Economic Commission
for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLA) at that time, Gonzalo Martinez-
Cabañas, to write a text for the second annual meeting of ECLA, that was going
to take place in Havana, Cuba on May 14, 1949. Initially, Prebisch wrote a long
text, but after having written the first draft, and on repeated suggestion, he
came to read Hans Singer's paper: "Post-War Relations between Under-developed
and Industrialized Countries" (Feb. 1949), about the deterioration of the terms
of trade, which became decisive for him. Prebisch asked to change his first
version, and in only three days and three nights, he wrote his book, quoting
Singer's paper and his basic conclusion, and later discussed it at the meeting.
The discovery of the long-term deterioration in the terms of trade for
underdeveloped countries must be attributed to Hans W. Singer. His
"explanation", however, stressing that the terms of trade moved against the
'borrowing' (i.e., underdeveloped) and in favour of the 'investing' (i.e.,
developed) countries, was similar to Prebisch's and published slightly later in
early 1950. Singer, like Prebisch, was a United Nations functionary but at the
New York headquarters. He believed himself to have reached his conclusions
independently from Prebisch and around the same time (Love, 1980: 58; H. W.
Singer, 1982: 13), but seems not then to have known that Prebisch had in fact
seen his trade statistics beforehand. Thus the thesis on the deterioration in
the terms of trade is known in the economic Literature as 'Prebisch-Singer
Thesis'. However, Prebisch specifically deals with the economic cycle and
highlights to a greater extent than Singer the reasons for the different
behaviour of wages in developed and underdeveloped countries.
