Single-party state A single-party state, one-party system or single-party
system is a type of party system government in which a single political party
forms the government and no other parties are permitted to run candidates for
election. Sometimes the term "de facto" single-party state is used to describe
a dominant-party system where laws or practices prevent the opposition from
legally getting power. Typically, single-party states hold the suppression of
political factions, except as transitory issue oriented currents within the
single party or permanent coalition as a self-evident good. Concept. Some
single party states only outlaw opposition parties, while allowing subordinate
allied parties to exist as part of a permanent coalition such as a popular
front. Within their own countries, dominant parties ruling over single-party
states are often referred to simply as "the Party". For example, in reference
to the Soviet Union, "the Party" meant the Communist Party of the Soviet Union;
in reference to the former People's Republic of Poland it referred to the
Polish United Workers' Party. Some one-party states may allow non-party members
to run for legislative seats, as was the case with Taiwan's Tangwai movement in
the 1970s and 1980s. Other single-party states may allow limited participation
by approved minor parties, such as the People's Republic of China under the
United Front, or the National Front in former East Germany. Most single-party
states have been ruled either by parties following the ideology of Marxism-
Leninism or international solidarity, such as the Soviet Union for most of its
existence, by parties following some type of nationalist or fascist ideology,
such as Germany under Adolf Hitler, or parties that came to power in the wake
of independence from colonial rule. One-party systems often arise from
decolonization because one party has had an overwhelmingly dominant role in
liberation or in independence struggles. Not all authoritarian states and
dictatorships operate based on single-party rule. Some, especially absolute
monarchies and certain military dictatorships, have made all political parties
illegal. The term "Communist state" is often used in the west to apply to
states in which the ruling party subscribes to a form of Marxism-Leninism.
However, such states do not use that term themselves, seeing communism as a
phase to develop after the full maturation of socialism, and instead often use
the titles of "people's republic," "socialist republic," or "democratic
republic." One peculiar example is Cuba, where the role of the Communist Party
is enshrined in the constitution, and no party is permitted to campaign or run
candidates for election, including the Communist party. Candidates are elected
on an individual referendum basis without formal party involvement, though
elected assemblies predominantly consist of members of the dominant party
alongside non-affiliated candidates. Examples. The True Whig Party of Liberia
is considered the founder of the first single-party state in the world, as
despite opposition parties never being outlawed, it completely dominated
Liberian politics from 1878 until 1980. The party was conceived by the original
Black American settlers and their descendants who referred to themselves as
Americo-Liberians. Initially, its ideology was heavily influenced by that of
the Whig Party in the United States. Over time it morphed into a powerful
Masonic Order that ruled every aspect of Liberian society for well over a
century until it was overthrown in 1980. While the True Whig Party still exists
today, its influence has substantially declined.
