Single-issue politics Single-issue politics involves political campaigning or
political support based on one essential policy area or idea. Political
expression. One weakness of such an approach is that effective political
parties are usually coalitions of factions or advocacy groups. Bringing
together political forces based on a single intellectual or cultural common
denominator can be unrealistic; though there may be considerable public opinion
on one side of an argument, it does not necessarily follow that mobilizing
under that one banner will bring results. A defining issue may indeed come to
dominate one particular electoral campaign, sufficiently to swing the result.
Imposing such an issue may well be what single-issue politics concern; but for
the most part success is rather limited, and electorates choose governments for
reasons with a broader base. Single-issue politics may express itself through
the formation of a single-issue party, an approach that tends to be more
successful in parliamentary systems based on proportional representation than
in rigid two-party systems (like that of the United States). Alternatively, it
may proceed through political advocacy groups of various kinds, including Lobby
groups, pressure groups and other forms of political expression external to
normal representative government. Within a broad-based party it may be the
concern of a single-issue caucus. Very visible as it was in Western democracies
in the second half of the twentieth century, single-issue politics is hardly a
new phenomenon. In the 1880s, the third government of William Ewart Gladstone
made British politics in practical terms single-issue, around the Home Rule
Bill, leading to a split of the Liberal Party. Groups and voters. Single-issue
politics are a form of litmus test; common examples are abortion, taxation,
animal rights, environment, and gun politics. The National Rifle Association in
the United States, which has only one specific interest, is an example of a
single-issue group. What differentiates single-issue groups from other interest
groups is their intense style of lobbying. The term "single-issue voter" has
been used to describe people who may make voting decisions based on the
candidates' stance on a single issue (e.g. "pro-life" or "pro-choice", support
for gun rights or gun-control). The existence of single-issue voters can give a
distorted impression: a candidate's overall views may not enjoy the same
support. For example, a person who votes for a socially conservative Republican
candidate, based solely on his or her support of gun rights, may not
necessarily share the candidate's other views on social issues, such as
abortion or family values. Single-issue parties. A single-issue party is a
political party that campaigns on only one issue. Such a party is rarely
successful in gaining elected office. It is generally believed that single-
issue parties are favoured by voluntary voting systems, as they tend to attract
very committed supporters who will always vote. Through systems like instant
runoff voting and proportional representation they can have substantial
influence on the results of elections. First past the post voting systems tend
to nullify their influence. In instant-runoff electoral systems which allow
unsuccessful parties to designate where their votes are redistributed, single-
issue parties may be formed as a way to funnel more votes to another candidate
with quite different policies. For instance, in the New South Wales state
election, 1999, one candidate who received just 0.2% of the primary vote
achieved the quota of 4.5% required to win a Legislative Council seat after
receiving preferences from a wide range of minor parties (including both the
'Gun Owners and Sporting Hunters Rights Party' and the 'Animal Liberation
Party'); MLC Lee Rhiannon accused many of these parties of being nothing more
than fronts..[http://www.parliament.nsw.gov.au/prod/parlment/hanstrans.nsf/
V3ByKey/LC19991110] Some examples of single-issue parties are the former Greedy
40% Extra party formed to protest against the increase in politician wages, the
Bloc Québécois party in Canada, formed to call for the separation of Quebec,
and the Party for the Animals, which gained two seats in the Dutch parliament
in 2006. Green parties and cannabis political parties, which exist in a number
of countries, are explicitly based around single issues. These parties often
evolve to adopt a full platform, however, and most Green parties and today's
Bloc Québécois have full platforms. In the case of the Bloc Québécois,
separatism is today a secondary issue.
