Sinistrisme Sinistrisme is a neologism invented by Albert Thibaudet in "Les
idées politiques de la France" (1932). He referred to the progressive
substitution of left wing parties by new, more radical parties, which in turn
pushed each party towards the center (the Radical Party being replaced by the
French Section of the Workers' International (SFIO, a socialist party), the
Socialists by the French Communist Party, etc.). This historical movement (seen
by Thibaudet as a historical necessity) thus explained, according to Thibaudet,
the tendency of the right-wing, in particular in France, to disavow the label
"droit" (right), long associated in French history with monarchism, in favour
of "left". Hence, those who rallied to the Republic in 1893 still adopted the
denomination "Droite constitutionnelle" or "républicaine" (Constitutional or
Republican Right), but replaced it in 1899 by "Action libérale", under which
they went to the 1902 elections. An explicit right wing group resurged in 1910,
gathering the last nostalgics of the monarchy. According to historian René
Rémond, since 1924 the term "right wing" vanished from the parliamentary
group's glossary. Deputies from the Democratic Republican Alliance (ARD), which
was the main center-right parliamentary formation under the Third Republic, sat
in the parliamentary group of "Left-wing Republicans". Following the
Liberation, the Rally of the Republican Lefts (RGR) gathered conservative
deputies, mostly from the Radical-Socialist Party (and opponents of Pierre
Mendès-France as well as Independent Radicals who had left the Radical Party
in 1928, opposed to its alliance with the left-wing during the Cartel des
gauches), and from the UDSR. René Rémond remarked that "at the 1974
presidential election, only one candidate declared himself as belonging to the
right-wing: Jean-Marie Le Pen; in 1981, no one." "Conservative" (which had been
the name of an ultra-royalist review in 1818-1820) was a synonym of "right
wing" often used under the Third Republic, in particular by the "Bloc national"
Chamber. "Independents", used in the 1920s for deputies close to the "Action
française" royalist movement, was later used by less reactionary politicians.
