Sitdown strike A sit-down strike is a form of civil disobedience in which an
organized group of workers, usually employed at a factory or other centralized
location, take possession of the workplace by "sitting down" at their stations,
effectively preventing their employers from replacing them with strikebreakers
or, in some cases, moving production to other locations. Workers have used this
technique since the beginning of the 20th century, not only in the United
States, but also in Italy, Poland, Yugoslavia, and France. The Industrial
Workers of the World (IWW) were the first American union to use the sit-down
strike. On December 10, 1906, at the General Electric Works in Schenectady, New
York, 3,000 workers sat down on the job and stopped production to protest the
dismissal of three fellow IWW members. The United Auto Workers staged
successful sit-down strikes in the 1930s, most famously in the Flint Sit-Down
Strike of 1936-1937. In Flint, Michigan, strikers occupied several General
Motors plants for more than forty days, and repelled the efforts of the police
and National Guard to retake them. A wave of sit-down strikes followed, but
diminished by the end of the decade as the courts and the National Labor
Relations Board held that sit-down strikes were illegal and sit-down strikers
could be fired. While some sit-down strikes still occur in the United States,
they tend to be spontaneous and short-lived. French workers engaged in a number
of factory occupations in the wake of the French student revolt in May 1968. At
one point more than twenty-five percent of French workers were on strike, many
of them occupying their factories. In 1973, the workers at the Triumph
Motorcycles factory at Meriden, West Midlands locked the new owners, NVT, out
following the announcement of their plan to close Meriden. The sit-in lasted
over a year until the British government intervened, the result of which was
the formation of the Meriden Motorcycle Co-operative which produced Triumphs
until their closure in 1983. The sit-down strike was the inspiration for the
sit-in, where an organized group of protesters would occupy an area in which
they are not wanted by sitting and refuse to leave until their demands are met.
