Situational ethics Situational ethics, or situation ethics, is a Christian
ethical theory that was principally developed in the 1960s by the then
Episcopal priest Joseph Fletcher. It basically states that sometimes other
moral principles can be cast aside in certain situations if love is best
served; as Paul Tillich once put it: "Love is the ultimate law." The moral
principles Fletcher is specifically referring to are the moral codes of
Christianity and the type of love he is specifically referring to is
'αγαπη' love. Agapē is a Greek term meaning love (sometimes translated as
unconditional love). Fletcher believed that in forming an ethical system based
on love, he was best expressing the notion of "love thy neighbor," which Jesus
Christ taught in the Gospels of the New Testament of the Bible. Through
situational ethics, Fletcher attempted to find a "middle road" between
legalistic and antinomian ethics. Fletcher developed situational ethics in his
books: "The Classic Treatment" and "Situation Ethics". Fletcher believed that
there are no absolute laws other than the law of Agapē love and all the other
laws were laid down in order to achieve the greatest amount of this love. This
means that all the other laws are only guidelines to how to achieve this love,
and thus they may be broken if the other course of action would result in more
love. Situational ethics is a teleological, or consequential theory, in that it
is concerned with the outcome or consequences of an action; the "end". In the
case of situational ethics, the ends "can" justify the means or rules can be
used to justify the means if a situation is not intrinsically bad. Ethical
classification. Because of its consequentialism, situational ethics is often
confused with utilitarianism, because utilitarianism's aim is the greatest good
for the greatest number, although situational ethics focuses more on creating
the greatest amount of love and it also has different origins. Having said
that, however, situational ethics can also be classed under the ethical theory
genre of "proportionalism" which says that "It is never right to go against a
principle unless there is a proportionate reason which would justify it"
("Hoose, 1987"). Fletcher's four examples. Joseph Fletcher famously gave four
situations as examples in which the established moral laws might need to be put
on hold in order to achieve the greater amount of love. They were all either
real situations, or based upon real situations; also he never gave any final
judgment for these situations, but rather made people think about the best
outcomes themselves. Himself Might his Quietus Make. Pragmatism, positivism,
relativism and personalism are the 4 working principles which mean to be
reasonably sure the act you take will work and provide the most loving
consequence, accepting Situational Ethics as a matter of faith and not reason,
each situation must be relative to love and bring about the most loving result
and finally the needs of people come first rather than a set of rules.
Sacrificial Adultery. These situations were criticised by many as being quite
extreme, although Joseph Fletcher agreed that they were so, because in normal
cases, the general guidelines should be applied and it is only in extreme cases
that exceptions would need to be made. Situational ethics outlined. Fletcher
outlined his theory in ten principles, which he split into the four working
principles and the six fundamental principles. Biblical links. As a priest,
Joseph Fletcher claimed situational ethics to be a true set of Christian morals
that tie in with Biblical teaching. However, not all people agree with him on
this, so here are some passages of relevant biblical scripture (from the New
International Version), and it is left to the reader as to whether the
teachings of situational ethics are Biblical or not. Jesus in relation to The
Law and The Prophets. "Do not think that I have come to abolish the Law or the
Prophets; I have not come to abolish them but to fulfill them. I tell you the
truth, until Heaven and Earth disappear, not the smallest letter, not the least
stroke of a pen, will by any means disappear from the Law until everything is
accomplished. Anyone who breaks one of the least of these commandments and
teaches others to do so will be called least in the kingdom of Heaven, but
whoever practices and teaches these commands will be called great in the
kingdom of Heaven."
