Slacktivism Slacktivism (sometimes slactivism or slackervism) is a portmanteau
of the words "slacker" and "activism". The word is usually considered a
pejorative term that describes "feel-good" measures, in support of an issue or
social cause, that have little or no practical effect other than to make the
person doing it feel some amount of satisfaction. The acts tend to require
minimal personal effort from the slacktivist. The underlying assumption being
promoted by the term is that these low cost efforts substitute for more
substantive actions rather than supplementing them, although this assumption
has not been borne out by research. Slacktivist activities include signing
Internet petitions, joining a community organization without contributing to
the organization's efforts, copying and pasting of Social Network statuses or
messages or altering one's personal data or avatar on social network services.
Research is beginning to explore the connection between the concept and modern
activism/advocacy, as groups are increasingly using social media to facilitate
civic engagement and collective action. The Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS describes the term "slacktivist", saying it "posits that people who
support a cause by performing simple measures are not truly engaged or devoted
to making a change". Use of the Term. The term appears to have been coined by
Dwight Ozard and Fred Clark in 1995 at the Cornerstone Festival. The term was
meant to shorten the phrase slacker activism, which refers to bottom up
activities by young people to affect society on a small, personal scale (such
as planting a tree, as opposed to participating in a protest). The term
originally had a positive connotation. Radio host and political commentator Dan
Carlin was using the term on his show in the 1990s and may have coined the
present day meaning. Monty Phan, staff writer for Newsday, was an early user of
the term in his 2001 article titled, "On the Net, "Slacktivism' / Do-Gooders
Flood In-Boxes" (Phan 2001). An early example of using the term "slacktivism"
appeared in Barnaby Feder's article in "The New York Times" called "They
Weren't Careful What They Hoped For." Feder quoted anti-scam crusader Barbara
Mikkelson of Snopes.com, who described activities such as those listed above.
"It's all fed by slacktivism ... the desire people have to do something good
without getting out of their chair" (Feder 2002). Another example of the term
"Slacktivism" appeared in Evgeny Morozov’s book, "Net Delusion: How Not To
Liberate the World". In his book, Morozov relates slacktivism to the Colding-
Jorgensen experiment: In 2009, a Danish psychologist named Colding Jorgensen
created a fictitious Facebook group, as part of his research. On the page, he
announced that the Copenhagen city authorities would be demolishing the
historical Storck fountain site. 125 Facebook members joined the Jorgensen’s
page within the first day, and the number of fans began to grow at a staggering
rate, eventually reaching 27,500. Morozov argues the Colding-Jorgensen
experiment reveals a key component of slacktivism: “When communication costs
are low, groups can easily spring into action.” Clay Shirky also similarly
characterized slacktivism as “ridiculously easy group forming.” Defense and
criticism. Despite the pejorative connotation of the term, a recent
correlational study conducted by Georgetown University entitled “The Dynamics
of Cause Engagement” determined that so-called slacktivists are indeed
“more likely to take meaningful actions.” Notably, “slacktivists
participate in more than twice as many activities as people who don’t engage
in slacktivism, and their actions “have a higher potential to influence
others.” Cited benefits of slacktivism in achieving clear objectives include
creating a secure, low cost, effective means of organizing that are
environmentally friendly. These "social champions" have the ability to directly
link social media engagement with responsiveness, leveraging their transparent
dialogue into economic, social or political action. Yet skepticism of
slacktivism’s value certainly exists. Particularly, some argue that it
entails an underlying assumption that all problems can be seamlessly fixed
using social media, and while this may be true for local issues, slacktivism
could prove ineffective for solving global predicaments. In turn,
organizationally speaking, slacktivism may result in a “waste of resources,
lack of productivity and a risk of liability for the employer.” A 2009 NPR
piece asked whether "the publicity gains gained through this greater reliance
on new media worth the organizational losses that traditional activists
entities are likely to suffer, as ordinary people would begin to turn away from
conventional (and proven) forms of activism." Criticism of slacktivism often
involves the idea that internet activities are ineffective, and/or that they
prevent or lessen political participation in real life. However, as many
studies on slacktivism relate only to a specific case or campaign, it is
difficult to find an exact percentage of slacktivist actions that reach a
stated goal. Furthermore, many studies also focus on such activism in
democratic or open contexts, whereas the act of publicly liking, RSVPing or
adopting an avatar or slogan as one's profile picture can be a defiant act in
authoritarian or repressive countries. The Western-centric nature of the
critique of slacktivism discounts the impact it can have in authoritarian or
repressive contexts. Journalist Courtney C. Radsch argues that even such low
level of engagement was an important form of activism for Arab youth before and
during the Arab Spring because it was a form of free speech, and could
successfully spark mainstream media coverage, such as when a hashtag becomes "a
trending topic helps generate media attention, even as it helps organize
information. The power of social media to help shape the international news
agenda is one of the ways in which they subvert state authority and power." In
addition, studies suggest that "fears of Internet activities supplanting real
life activity are unsubstantiated," in that they do not cause a negative or
positive effect on political participation. Malcolm Gladwell, in his October
2010 New Yorker Article, lambasted those who compare social media "revolutions"
with actual activism that challenges the status quo ante. He argued that
today's social media campaigns can't compare with activism that takes place on
the ground, using the Greensboro sit-ins as an example of what real, high-risk
activism looks like. "As the historian Robert Darnton has written, “The
marvels of communication technology in the present have produced a false
consciousness about the past—even a sense that communication has no history,
or had nothing of importance to consider before the days of television and the
Internet.” But there is something else at work here, in the outsized
enthusiasm for social media. Fifty years after one of the most extraordinary
episodes of social upheaval in American history, we seem to have forgotten what
activism is. In response to his criticism, Mirani argues that he might be right
if activism is defined only as sit-ins, taking direct actions, and
confrontations on the streets. However, if activism is about arousing awareness
of people, changing people's minds, and influencing opinions across the
world,then 'the revolution will be indeed be tweeted', 'hashtagged', and
'YouTubed' In a March 2012 Financial Times article, referring to efforts to
address the on-going violence related to the Lord's Resistance Army, Matthew
Green wrote that the slactivists behind the Kony 2012 video had "achieved more
with their 30-minute video than battalions of diplomats, NGO workers and
journalists have since the conflict began 26 years ago." However, it was
unclear what precisely they achieved. Clicktivism. The term "clicktivism" is
sometimes used to describe activists using social media to organise protests.
It allows organizations to quantify their success by keeping track of how many
"clicked" on their petition or other call to action. For example, the British
group UK Uncut uses Twitter and other websites to organise protests and direct
action against companies accused of tax avoidance. This varies from slacktivism
in that it merely replaces older ways of communicating a protest's existence
(telephone, word of mouth, leaflets etc.) and does actually involve a real
life, physical protest. On the other hand, clicktivism is also used to describe
forms of internet based slacktivism such as signing online petitions or signing
and sending form letter emails to politicians or corporate CEOs. Critics of
clicktivism state that this new phenomenon turns social movements to resemble
advertising campaigns in which messages are tested, clickthrough rate is
recorded, and A/B testing is often done. In order to improve these metrics,
messages are reduced to make their "asks easier and actions simpler." This in
turn reduced social action to have members that are a list of email addresses
rather than engaged people. Charity slacktivism. Charity slacktivism can be
described as actions in support of a cause that take little effort on the part
of the individual. Examples of online charity slacktivism include changing
one's Facebook status to support a cause, joining a charity organization's
Facebook page or "liking" a cause on Facebook, tweeting or retweeting a charity
organization's request for support, signing Internet petitions, and posting and
sharing YouTube videos about a cause. Recent examples include the Kony 2012
campaign that exploded in social media in March 2012. Examples of offline
charity slacktivism include awareness wristbands and paraphernalia in support
of causes, such as the Livestrong wristband and the Product Red campaign
products, as well as bumper stickers and mobile donating. The term slacktivism
is often used to describe the world's reaction to the 2010 Haiti earthquake.
The Red Cross managed to raise $5 million in 2 days via text message donations
Social media outlets were used to spread the word about the earthquake. The day
after the earthquake, CNN reported that four of Twitter's top topics were
related to the Haitian earthquake [http://articles.cnn.com/2010-01-14/tech/
cashmore.haiti.earthquake.relief.technology_1_social-media-twitter-and-
facebook-text-haiti/2?_s=PM:TECH. These impressive responses by the world
community were both praised as helpful reactions and condemned as throwing
money at a problem that needed a different type of response. Luxury good
slacktivism. The act of purchasing luxury brand goods that highlight support
for a particular cause and advertises that a percentage of the cost of the good
will go to the cause. In some instances the donated funds are spread across
various entities within one foundation which in theory helps out several
deserving areas of the cause but criticisms of this type of donation highlight
the thin spread of the donation. Slacktivists may also purchase a product from
a company because it has a history of donating funds to charity, as a way to
second-handedly support a cause. For example, a slactivist may buy Ben and
Jerry's ice cream because its founders invested in the nation’s children, or
promoted social and environmental concerns. Politically motivated slacktivism.
Certain forms of slacktivism have political goals in mind, such as gaining
support for a presidential campaign, or signing an internet petition that aims
to influence governmental action.
