Slavophile Slavophilia was an intellectual movement originating from 19th
century that wanted the Russian Empire to be developed upon values and
institutions derived from its early history. Slavophiles were especially
opposed to the influences of Western Europe in Russia. There were also similar
movements in Poland, Hungary and Greece. Its opposite is Slavophobia. History.
Slavophilism, as an intellectual movement, was developed in the 19th-century
Russia. In a sense there was not one but many Slavophile movements, or many
branches of the same movement. Some were to the left of the political spectrum,
noting that progressive ideas such as democracy were intrinsic to the Russian
experience, as proved by what they considered to be the rough democracy of
medieval Novgorod. Some were to the right of the spectrum and pointed to the
centuries-old tradition of the autocratic Tsar as being the essence of the
Russian nature. The Slavophiles were determined to protect what they believed
were unique Russian traditions and culture. In doing so, they rejected
individualism. The role of the Orthodox Church was seen by them as more
significant than the role of the state. Socialism was opposed by Slavophiles as
an alien thought, and Russian mysticism was preferred over "Western
rationalism". Rural life was praised by the movement, opposing
industrialization as well as urban development, while protection of the "mir"
was seen as an important measure to prevent growth of the working class. The
movement originated in Moscow in the 1830s. Drawing on the works of Greek
patristics, the poet Aleksey Khomyakov (1804–60) and his devoutly Orthodox
colleagues elaborated a traditionalistic doctrine that claimed Russia has its
own distinct way, which doesn't have to imitate and mimic "Western"
institutions. The Russian Slavophiles denounced modernization by Peter the
Great and Catherine the Great, and some of them even adopted traditional pre-
Petrine dress. Andrei Okara argues that the 19th century classification of
social thought into three groups, the Westernizers, the Slavophiles and the
Conservatives also fits well into the realities of the political and social
situation in modern Russia. According to him, examples of modern-day
slavophiles include the Communist Party of the Russian Federation, Dmitry
Rogozin and Sergei Glazyev. Doctrine. The doctrines of Aleksey Khomyakov, Ivan
Kireevsky (1806–56), Konstantin Aksakov (1817–60) and other Slavophiles had
a deep impact on Russian culture, including the Russian Revival school of
architecture, The Five of Russian composers, the novelist Nikolai Gogol, the
poet Fyodor Tyutchev, the lexicographer Vladimir Dahl, and others. Their
struggle for purity of the Russian language had something in common with
ascetic views of Leo Tolstoy. The doctrine of Sobornost, the term for organic
unity, intregration, was coined by Ivan Kireevsky and Aleksey Khomyakov. This
was to underline the need for cooperation between people, at the expense of
individualism on the basis that the opposing groups focus on what is common
between them. In the sphere of practical politics, the Slavophilism manifested
itself as a pan-Slavic movement for the unification of all Slavic people under
leadership of the Russian tsar and for the independence of the Balkan Slavs
from Ottoman rule. The Russo-Turkish War, 1877-78 is usually considered a high
point of this militant Slavophilism, as expounded by the charismatic commander
Mikhail Skobelev. The attitude towards other nations with Slavic origins
varied, depending on the group involved. Classical Slavophiles believed that
"Slavdom", that is the alleged by Slavophile movement common identity to all
people of Slavic origin, was based on Orthodox religion. The Russian Empire,
besides containing Russians, ruled over millions of Ukrainians, Poles and
Belarussians, who had their own national identities, traditions and religions.
Towards Ukrainians and Belarussians, the Slavophiles developed the view that
they were part of the same "Great Russian" nation, Belarussians being the
"White Russians" and Ukrainians "Little Russians". Slavophile thinkers such as
Mikhail Katkov believed that both nations should be ruled under Russian
leadership and were an essential part of the Russian state. At the same time
they denied the separate cultural identity of Ukrainian and Belarussian people,
believing their national as well as language and literary aspirations were a
result of "Polish intrigue" that aimed at separating them from Russians. Other
Slavophiles like Ivan Aksakov recognized the right of Ukrainians to use the
Ukrainian language, however seeing it as completely unnecessary and harmful.
Aksakov, however, did see some practical use for the "Malorussian" language: it
would be beneficial in the struggle against the "Polish civilizational element
in the western provinces". Besides Ukrainians and Belarussians, the Russian
Empire also included Poles, whose country had disappeared after being
partitioned by three neighboring states, including Russia, which after
decisions of the Congress of Vienna expanded into more Polish-inhabited
territories. Poles proved to be a problem for the ideology of Slavophilism. The
very name Slavophiles indicated that the characteristics of the Slavs were
based on their ethnicity, but at the same time Slavophiles believed that
Orthodoxy equaled Slavdom. This belief was belied by very existence of Poles
within the Russian Empire, who - while having Slavic origins - were also deeply
Roman Catholic, the Catholic faith forming one of the core values of Polish
national identity. Also, while Slavophiles praised the leadership of Russia
over other nations of Slavic origin, the Poles' very identity was based on
Western European culture and values, and resistance to Russia was seen by them
as resistance to something representing an alien way of life. As a result
Slavophiles were particularly hostile to the Polish nation, often emotionally
attacking it in their writings When the Polish uprising of 1863 started,
Slavophiles used anti-Polish sentiment to create feelings of national unity in
the Russian people, and the idea of cultural union of all Slavs was abandoned.
With that Poland became firmly established to Slavophiles as symbol of
Catholicism and Western Europe, that they detested, and as Poles were never
assimilated within the Russian Empire, constantly resisting Russian occupation
of their country, in the end Slavophiles came to believe that annexation of
Poland was a mistake due to the fact that the Polish nation could not be
Russified. "After the struggle with Poles, Slavophiles expressed their belief,
that notwithstanding the goal of conquering Constantinople, the future conflict
would be between the "Teutonic race" (Germans), and "Slavs", and the movement
turned into Germanophobia. It should be noted that most Slavophiles were
liberals and ardently supported the emancipation of serfs, which was finally
realized in the emancipation reform of 1861. Press censorship, serfdom, and
capital punishment were viewed as baneful influences of Western Europe. Their
political ideal was a parliamentary monarchy, as represented by the medieval
Zemsky Sobors. Post serfdom. After serfdom was abolished in Russia and the end
of the uprising in Poland, Slavophilism began to degenerate and turned into
narrow-minded Russian aggressive nationalism.{citation needed} New Slavophile
thinkers appeared in the 1870s and 1880s, represented by scholars such as N.
Danilevsky and K. Leontiev. Danilevsky promoted autocracy and imperialistic
expansion as part of Russian national interest. Leontiev believed in a police
state ideology aimed at preventing European influences from reaching Russia.
"Pochvennichestvo". Later writers Fyodor Dostoyevsky, Konstantin Leontyev, and
Nikolay Danilevsky developed a peculiar conservative version of Slavophilism
called "pochvennichestvo" (from the Russian word for soil). This teaching, as
articulated by Konstantin Pobedonostsev (Ober-Procurator of the Russian
Orthodox Church), was adopted as the official Tsarist ideology during the
reigns of Alexander III and Nicholas II. Even after the Russian Revolution of
1917, it was further developed by the émigré religious philosophers like Ivan
Ilyin (1883–1954). Many of the Slavophiles influenced prominent Cold War
thinkers such as George F. Kennan, instilling in them a love for the Russian
Empire as opposed to the Soviet Union. This in turn influenced their foreign
policy ideas, such as Kennan's belief that the revival of the Russian Orthodox
Patriarchate in 1943 would lead to the reform or overthrow of Joseph Stalin's
dictatorship.
