Smith College Smith College is a private, independent women's liberal arts
college located in Northampton, Massachusetts, United States. It is the largest
member of the Seven Sisters. Smith is also a member of the Five Colleges
consortium, which allows its students to attend classes at four other Pioneer
Valley institutions: Mount Holyoke College, Amherst College, Hampshire College,
and the University of Massachusetts Amherst. In 2010, U.S. News & World Report
ranked it 14th among Best Liberal Arts Colleges. Notable alumnae include
Catharine MacKinnon, Nancy Reagan, Barbara Bush, Betty Friedan, Gloria Steinem,
Julia Child, Madeleine L'Engle, Sylvia Plath, Sherry Rehman, Sharmeen Obaid-
Chinoy, Rochelle Lazarus, Laura D'Andrea Tyson and Yolanda King. History.
college was chartered in 1871 by a bequest of Sophia Smith and opened its doors
in 1875 with 14 students and six faculty. When she inherited, at age 65, a
fortune from her father, Smith decided that leaving her inheritance to found a
women's college was the best way for her to fulfill the moral obligation she
expressed in her will: "I hereby make the following provisions for the
establishment and maintenance of an Institution for the higher education of
young women, with the design to furnish for my own sex means and facilities for
education equal to those which are afforded now in our colleges to young men."
By 1915–16 the student enrollment was 1,724 and the faculty numbered 163.
Today, with some 2,600 undergraduates on campus, and 250 students studying
elsewhere, Smith is the largest privately endowed college for women in the
country. The campus was planned and planted in the 1890s as a botanical garden
and arboretum, designed by Frederick Law Olmsted. The campus landscape now
encompasses and includes more than 1,200 varieties of trees and shrubs. Smith
has been led by 10 presidents and two acting presidents. For the 1975
centennial, the college inaugurated its first woman president, Jill Ker Conway
(Elizabeth Cutter Morrow was the first acting president of Smith College and
the first female head of the college, but she did not use the title of
president), who came to Smith from Australia by way of Harvard and the
University of Toronto. Since President Conway's term, all Smith presidents have
been women, with the exception of John M. Connolly's one-year term as acting
president in the interim after President Simmons left to lead Brown University.
Academics and educational programs. Smith College has 285 professors in 41
academic departments and programs, for a faculty:student ratio of 1:9. It is
the first and only women's college in the United States to grant its own
undergraduate degrees in engineering. The Picker Engineering Program offers a
single ABET accredited Bachelor of Science in engineering science, combining
the fundamentals of multiple engineering disciplines. Smith recently joined the
SAT optional movement for undergraduate admission. Smith runs its own junior
year abroad (JYA) programs in four European cities: Paris, Hamburg, Florence
and Geneva. These programs are notable for requiring all studies to be
conducted in the language of the host country (with both Paris and Geneva
programs conducted in French). In some cases students live in homestays with
local families. Nearly half of Smith's juniors study overseas, either through
Smith JYA programs or at more than 40 other locations around the world. Junior
math majors from other undergraduate institutions are invited to study at Smith
College for one year through the Center for Women in Mathematics. Established
in the fall of 2007 by Professors Ruth Haas and Jim Henle, the program aims to
allow young women to improve their mathematical abilities through classwork,
research and involvement in a department centered on women. The Center also
offers a post-baccalaureate year of math study to women who either did not
major in mathematics as undergraduates or whose mathematics major was not
strong. The Louise W. and Edmund J. Kahn Liberal Arts Institute supports
collaborative research without regard to the traditional boundaries of academic
departments and programs. Each year the Institute supports long-term and short-
term projects proposed, planned and organized by members of the Smith College
faculty. By becoming Kahn Fellows, students get involved in interdisciplinary
research projects and work alongside faculty and visiting scholars for a year.
Students can develop leadership skills through Smith's two-year Phoebe Reese
Lewis Leadership Program. Participants train in public speaking, analytical
thinking, teamwork strategies and the philosophical aspects of leadership.
Through Smith's internship program, "Praxis: The Liberal Arts at Work," every
undergraduate is guaranteed access to one college funded internship during her
years at the college. This program enables students to access interesting self-
generated internship positions in social welfare and human services, the arts,
media, health, education, and other fields. The Ada Comstock Scholars Program
is a bachelor's degree program for non-traditional students. Graduate degrees
and study options. Smith offers men and women graduate work leading to the
degrees of master of arts in teaching (elementary, middle or high school),
master of fine arts, master of education of the deaf, master of science in
biological sciences, master of science in exercise and sport studies and master
and Ph.D. in social work. In special one-year programs, international students
may qualify for a certificate of graduate studies or a diploma in American
studies. Each year approximately 100 men and women pursue advanced graduate
work at Smith. Also offered in a non-degree studies program is the Diploma in
American Studies. This is a highly competitive one-year program open only to
international students of advanced undergraduate or graduate standing. It is
designed primarily, although not exclusively, for those who are teaching or who
plan to teach some aspect of American culture and institutions. The Smith
College master of social work (M.S.W.) degree is nationally recognized for its
specialization in clinical social work and puts a heavy emphasis on direct
field work practice. The program is accredited by the Council on Social Work
Education. The school also offers a Ph.D. program designed to prepare MSWs for
leadership positions in clinical research education and practice. The college
has a limited number of other programs leading to Ph.D.s, and is part of a
cooperative doctoral program co-administered by Amherst College, Hampshire
College, Mount Holyoke College and the University of Massachusetts Amherst.
Houses. Smith College has many different houses serving as dormitories. Each
house is self-governing and collects its own dues. While many students remain
in the same house for the entirety of their four years at Smith, they are not
obligated to do so, and may move to different houses on campus as space allows.
Houses are found in three main regions of campus: Upper and Lower Elm Street,
Green Street/Center Campus, and the Quadrangle. Each region can, in turn, be
divided into smaller areas to more precisely provide the location of the house
in question. Traditions. Athletics. 's athletic teams have been known as the
Pioneers since 1986. The name expresses the spirit of Smith's students and the
college's leadership role in women's athletics (the first women's basketball
game was played at Smith in 1893). A new spirit mark was unveiled to the Smith
community in December 2008. The new visual identity for Smith's sports teams
marks the culmination of a yearlong project to promote visibility and
enthusiasm for Smith's intercollegiate and club teams—and to generate school
spirit broadly. It will be used for athletics uniforms, casual apparel and
promotional items for clubs and organizations. As Smith was the first women’s
college to join the NCAA, the new mark is seen as linking the college’s
pioneering alumnae athletes to their equally determined and competitive
counterparts today.[http://www.smith.edu/spirit/] Smith College does not have
college colors in the usual sense. Its official color is white, trimmed with
gold, but the official college logo is currently blue and yellow (a previous
logo was burgundy and white). NCAA athletic teams have competed in blue and
white (or blue and yellow, in the case of the soccer, crew, swimming, and
squash teams) uniforms since the 1970s, and selected Pioneers as the official
name and mascot in 1986. Popular club sports are free to choose their own
colors and mascot; both Rugby and Fencing have chosen red and black. Smith has
a rotating system of class colors dating back to the 1880s, when intramural
athletics and other campus competitions were usually held by class. Today,
class colors are yellow, red, blue and green, with incoming first-year classes
assigned the color of the previous year's graduating class; their color then
"follows" them through to graduation. Alumnae classes, particularly at reunion,
continue to identify with and use their class color thereafter. Residential
culture and student life. Smith requires all first-year undergraduate students,
as well as most other undergraduates, to live in on-campus houses unless they
reside locally with their family. This policy is intended to add to the
camaraderie and social cohesion of its students. Unlike most institutions of
its type, Smith College does not have dorms, but rather 36 separate houses,
ranging in architectural style from 18th-century to contemporary. (A popular
rumor perpetuated by students is that Sophia Smith stated in her will that each
house be constructed in the style of the period; this is, however, only an
urban legend). Two recent additions to the campus, both of which enhance its
sense of community, are the architecturally dramatic Campus Center and the
state-of-the-art Olin Fitness Center. In 2009, construction was also completed
on Ford Hall, a new science and engineering facility. According to the Smith
College website, Ford Hall is a "...facility that will intentionally blur the
boundaries between traditional disciplines, creating an optimum environment for
students and faculty to address key scientific and technological developments
of our time." The building was officially dedicated on October 16, 2009. The
campus also boasts a botanic garden that includes a Japanese tea house, a
variety of specialty gardens including a rock garden, and historic glass
greenhouses dating back to 1895. It is rumored that the architecture of Chapin
House was the inspiration for the one in Tara in "Gone with the Wind".
(Margaret Mitchell went to Smith for one year.) A novelty of Smith's homelike
atmosphere is the continuing popularity of Sophia Smith's recipe for molasses
cookies. These are often served at the traditional Friday afternoon tea held in
each house, where students, faculty and staff members and alumnae socialize.
Smith offers "panel discussions and seminars for lesbian, bisexual, and
transgender students on subjects such as coming out as transgender at work." In
2003, Smith students voted to remove pronouns from the language of the Student
Government Association constitution, in order to make that document inclusive
of transgendered students who don't identify with the female pronouns "she" and
"her." Academic year events. Convocation signals the start of the fall
semester. For new students it is the first chance to experience Smith College's
tradition and spirit. Likewise, for some returning students, the annual event
is like a big, welcome-home party as well as an occasion for celebration and an
opportunity for creative attire. House communities develop imaginative themes
for group fashion, and Smith seniors put special touches on favorite hats to
create their own unique "senior hats," to be worn for the first time at
Convocation. Mountain Day is observed early in the fall semester. The President
of the College selects a crisp, sunny, beautiful autumn day when the leaves are
in full color, and announces the cancellation of classes by having bells rung
on campus at 7:15 AM on the chosen day. The eager anticipation of Mountain Day
leads to intense speculation meteorology by students in the weeks leading up to
the surprise announcement. Traditional observance of Mountain Day by students
might involve New England road trips or outdoor pursuits, and college dining
services provides box lunches to be taken off-campus. Otelia Cromwell Day,
named for Smith's first African-American student, began in 1989 to provide
students with an in-depth program specifically addressing issues of racism and
diversity. Afternoon classes are cancelled, and students are invited to
participate in lectures, workshops, symposia and cultural events focused on a
different theme each year. Rally Day In February 1876, the College began an
annual observance of George Washington's birthday. In 1894, a rally became part
of the day's events, and the focus of the celebration became primarily
patriotic rather than exclusively social—though always with a women's college
twist. Students that year staged a mock debate on the subject, "Does Higher
Education Unfit a Man for Domestic Life?" In 1906 the celebration was first
referred to as Rally Day (although the name was not used officially by the
College until 1992). In 1944, seniors made Rally Day the first public wearing
of their graduation caps and gowns; since then, mortarboards have been replaced
by wacky, often homemade hats. Today, the Rally Day Convocation is centered
around a historical theme, and features a distinguished keynote speaker and the
awarding of Smith College Medals to accomplished alumnae. Reunions and
Commencement events. The Alumnae Association of Smith College hosts official
class reunions every five years, plus a special two-year reunion. All alumnae
from all classes are welcome to return in any year; "off-year" alumnae attend
campus-wide events as the "Class of 1776." Traditional reunion and Commencement
events are linked, and celebrate the close ties between Smith's alumnae and its
graduating seniors and their families. At the conclusion of final exams, most
underclasswomen leave the campus, while seniors remain in their houses for a
week to celebrate and prepare for Commencement. Alumnae arrive for reunions
later in the week, and many alumnae arrange for official accommodations in the
campus houses, right alongside senior residents. Ivy Day, the day before
Commencement, is the high point of reunion and a significant event for seniors
as well. Junior ushers lead a parade through campus, carrying vines of ivy to
be planted by the departing seniors as a symbol of their lifelong connection to
the college. Alumnae (and, often, their children), dressed in white and wearing
sashes in their class color, line up in reverse order by class along both sides
of the route. Seniors line up nearest the end of the parade route, wearing
traditional white outfits and each carrying a single red rose. All cheer each
alumnae class as it marches past, then fall in to join the end of the parade.
Many alumnae classes carry signs with humorous poems or slogans, or hold
balloons or wear hats in their class color. Ivy Day festivities conclude in the
Quad, where the seniors plant their ivy and speakers address alumnae on the
progress of fundraising and the state of the college. Illumination Night,
beginning at dusk on the Saturday evening before Commencement, is a celebration
of the campus and a send-off of sorts for graduating seniors. Throughout
central campus, electric street lights are replaced for one night by
multicolored Japanese-style paper lanterns, lit with real candles. These hang
on both sides of every walking path and cast a soft glow over the buildings and
lawns. Student a cappella singing groups and improv comedy troupes roam the
campus, stopping occasionally to entertain the crowds. A jazz band, hired by
the college, turns the science buildings' courtyard into a dance floor.
Seniors, alumnae, faculty and their families spend the evening on walking tours
of the illuminated campus and Botanic Gardens. The major official event of the
night is the Senior Step Sing: seniors gather on the steps of Neilson Library,
where they are serenaded by members of the Sophomore Push committee, then are
physically pushed off the stairs and "into the real world." Until the early
1990s, all alumnae reunions were held during Commencement weekend. However, as
the number of returning alumnae grew beyond the capacity of the campus,
reunions were split into Reunion I/Commencement Weekend and Reunion II, held
the following weekend. "Significant" reunions (50-, 25- and 10- year, but also
2-year) and the earliest reunion classes (65-year and prior) are assigned to
Reunion I; other reunions (5-, 15-, 20-, 30-year, and so on) are assigned to
Reunion II. Campus folklore. Smith has numerous folk tales and ghost stories
that emerge from the histories of some of its historic buildings. One such tale
holds that Sessions House is inhabited by the ghost of Lucy Hunt, who died of a
broken heart after being separated from her lover, General Burgoyne. Reports of
a ghost in Sessions House predate its history as a campus house. Built in 1751
by the Hunt family, the house has a secret staircase where, according to
legend, the Hunt's eldest daughter Lucy would rendezvous with her lover,
General Burgoyne. The two were ultimately driven apart, and in the 1880s it was
believed that the ghost of a heartbroken Burgoyne haunted the staircase. Since
Sessions House became part of college housing in the 20th century, the specter
has taken on a decidedly feminine identity, and some former residents of
Sessions claim to have seen Lucy's ghost in the stairwell. Environmental
sustainability. Smith has taken numerous steps toward environmental
sustainability, including a 30% reduction in energy use. Also, through a
contract with Zipcar, the college has reduced the need for individually owned
cars on campus. Complimenting this effort, the college has also promoted
sustainability through academics and through the arts. In keeping with its
sustainability efforts, all Smith dining locations have discontinued the use of
"to-go" supplies which included paper cups and plates, as well as plastic
utensils. They now encourage students to bring their own, reusable containers
and utensils if they wish to bring food back to their rooms. Smith College
provides all students with a reusable drink container at the beginning of each
academic year. In past years, these containers have been variations on travel
mugs, Sigg bottles, and nalgenes. Those dining halls that still offer "To-Go"
options no longer provide paper bags, and instead use wax paper bags,
biodegradable plastic, and recyclable utensils made of vegetable cellulose. For
Smith's efforts regarding sustainability, the institution earned a grade of "A-
" on the "College Sustainability Report Card 2010" administered by the
Sustainable Endowments Institute. Smith was lauded for many of the indicator
categories, including student involvement, green building, and transportation,
but was marked down for endowment transparency. Notable alumnae. The Alumnae
Association of Smith College considers all former students to be members,
whether they graduated or not, and does not generally differentiate between
graduates and non-graduates when identifying Smith alumnae. Smith College in
popular culture. References to Smith abound in literature. In Sylvia Plath's
novel "The Bell Jar", the protagonist Esther Greenwood attends Smith College.
In "Running With Scissors," a memoir by Augusten Burroughs, the author details
how he and his foster-sister, Natalie, took walks together on the campus. The
fictional Catamount College in the novella "Beasts" by Joyce Carol Oates is
based on Smith College. The character Chenault in "The Rum Diary" by Hunter S.
Thompson went to Smith College. "Commencement", a novel by J. Courtney Sullivan
was published in 2009 and recounts the friendship of four Smith College
classmates. Smith has its place in films as well. The 1954 film "White
Christmas" referenced Smith. Jean Simmons plays a recent Smith grad in 1957's
"This Could Be the Night". The 1966 movie "Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?" and
the 1993 movie "Malice" were both filmed on the Smith campus. In the 1971 film
"Carnal Knowledge", Candice Bergen's character, Susan, is a Smith student, and
portions of the film take place on the Smith campus. The character Joanna
Kramer, played by Meryl Streep in the 1979 film "Kramer vs. Kramer", is a Smith
College graduate. In the movie "The Nanny Diaries" Mrs. X is a Smith alumna.
Spike Lee also has a reference to a Smithie as a lesbian paying an ex-biotech
exec to inseminate her and many other homosexual women in the movie "She Hate
Me". Sadie (Nicole Vicius) from 2007 lesbian-comedy Itty Bitty Titty Committee
dropped out of the college after meeting her partner, a guest lecturer at
Smith. Well-known television shows integrate references to Smith into character
plot lines. An episode in the second season of the series "Felicity (TV
series)" has a Smith College graduate who refuses to serve as an egg donor for
Javier because he is gay. Charlotte York in the show "Sex and the City" is a
Smith College graduate. In an episode of "The Simpsons"—"I'm Spelling as Fast
as I Can"—Lisa Simpson is tempted by the Siren-like representatives of the
Seven Sisters (and George Plimpton), who offer a scholarship to the Sister
school of her choice (and a George Plimpton hot plate) if she will throw a
Spelling Bee. Dr. Cristina Yang, a surgical resident played by Sandra Oh on
"Grey's Anatomy", graduated from Smith College with degrees in French
Literature and Chemistry, and lived in Chapin House. Ainsley Hayes (played by
Emily Procter), the conservative lawyer hired to work in the White House
Counsel's Office on "The West Wing", graduated from Smith. In an episode of
"Mad About You" Paul's sister and her girlfriend are referred to as "The
Fighting Lesbians." Paul (Paul Reiser) replies, "No, that would be the name of
the Smith College Ice Hockey Team." Emily Gilmore in the show "Gilmore Girls"
went to Smith and majored in history. In season two of "Nip Tuck"- episode
"Julia McNamara", Julia gets anesthesia before her facial surgery. One of the
dreams she has is that Dr. Liz Cruz's made-up daughter will be attending Smith
that coming fall. In the third season of ER, Dr. Doug Ross (played by George
Clooney) mentions he is dating a Smith graduate. Nurse Carol Hathaway makes a
joke about Dr. Ross's normal dates being unable to spell Smith. A very similar
joke was made in the movie White Christmas, which starred George Clooney's
aunt, Rosemary Clooney. In the 2009 "Heroes" episode "A Clear and Present
Danger", the Smith College viewbook is displayed prominently at the top of a
stack of college materials Claire Bennet is apparently reviewing. Angela
Petrelli asks Claire if she's found a favorite, to which Claire replies,
"Hamilton, Smith, Georgetown, they're all the best schools in the country." The
webcomic Questionable Content mentions Smith College (usually referred to as
"Smif" in the comic) as the place where one of the main characters, Marten, is
employed as library staff, and several of the minor characters attend. Ellen,
studies marine biology. Tai, Natasha and Cosette are also students. Jeph
Jacques, the author, went to Hampshire College, one of the neighboring schools.
Some characters from the webcomic Minimalist Stick Figure Theatre, set
primarily in Northampton, are students at Smith College. In a recent Hallmark
Channel original movie titled "Mrs. Washington Goes to Smith," Cybill Shepherd
stars in a story about a woman in her 40s who returns to Smith College to
finish her bachelor's degree. Smith alumna Susan Rice '63 wrote the script for
the film, which aired August 1, 2009. In Grace Metalious's 1956 novel Peyton
Place, the school teacher, Miss Elsie Thornton, is a Smith alum. In Grace
Metalious's 1960 novel "The Tight White Collar" the character Margery Cooper
attends Smith College.
