Socioeconomics __NOTOC__ Socioeconomics or socio-economics or social economics
is an umbrella term with different usages. 'Social economics' may refer broadly
to the "use of economics in the study of society." More narrowly, contemporary
practice considers behavioral interactions of individuals and groups through
social capital and social "markets" (not excluding for example, sorting by
marriage) and the formation of social norms. In the latter, it studies the
relation of economics to social values. A distinct supplemental usage describes
social economics as "a discipline studying the reciprocal relationship between
economic science on the one hand and social philosophy, ethics, and human
dignity on the other" toward social reconstruction and improvement or as also
emphasizing multidisciplinary methods from such fields as sociology, history,
and political science. In criticizing mainstream economics for its alleged
faulty philosophical premises (for example the pursuit of self-interest) and
neglect of dysfunctional economic relationships, such advocates tend to
classify social economics as heterodox. In many cases, socioeconomists focus on
the social impact of some sort of economic change. Such changes might include a
closing factory, market manipulation, the signing of international trade
treaties, new natural gas regulation, etc. Such social effects can be wide-
ranging in size, anywhere from local effects on a small community to changes to
an entire society. Examples of causes of socioeconomic impacts include new
technologies such as cars or mobile phones, changes in laws, changes in the
physical environment (such as increasing crowding within cities), and
ecological changes (such as prolonged drought or declining fish stocks). These
may affect patterns of consumption, the distribution of incomes and wealth, the
way in which people behave (both in terms of purchase decisions and the way in
which they choose to spend their time), and the overall quality of life. The
goal of socioeconomic study is generally to bring about socioeconomic
development, usually in terms of improvements in metrics such as GDP, life
expectancy, literacy, levels of employment, etc. Although harder to measure,
changes in less-tangible factors are also considered, such as personal dignity,
freedom of association, personal safety and freedom from fear of physical harm,
and the extent of participation in civil society.
