Socialist economics Socialist economics refers to the economic theories,
practices, and norms of hypothetical and existing socialist economic systems. A
socialist economy is based on some form of social ownership, which includes
varieties of public ownership and independent cooperatives, over the means of
production, wherein production is carried out to directly produce use-value
sometimes, but not always, coordinated through economic planning and a system
of accounting based on calculation-in-kind or a direct measure of labor-time.
The term "socialist economics" may also be applied to analysis of former and
existing economic systems that call themselves "socialist", such as the works
of Hungarian economist János Kornai. Socialist economics has been associated
with different schools of economic thought, most notably Marxian economics,
institutional economics, evolutionary economics and neoclassical economics.
Early socialism, like Ricardian socialism, was based on classical economics.
During the 20th century, proposals and models for planned economies and market
socialism were based heavily on neoclassical economics or a synthesis of
neoclassical economics with Marxian or institutional economics. Description. A
socialist economy is a system of production where goods and services are
produced directly for use, in contrast to a capitalist economic system, where
goods and services are produced to generate profit (and therefore indirectly
for use). Goods and services would be produced for their usefulness, or for
their use-value, eliminating the need for market-induced needs to ensure a
sufficient amount of demand for products to be sold at a profit. Production in
a socialist economy is therefore "planned" or "coordinated", and does not
suffer from the business cycle inherent to capitalism. In most socialist
theories, economic planning only applies to the factors of production and not
to the allocation of goods and services produced for consumption, which would
be distributed through a market. Karl Marx stated that "lower-stage communism"
would consist of compensation based on the amount of labor one contributes to
the social product. The ownership of the means of production varies in
different socialist theories. It can either be based on public ownership by a
state apparatus; direct ownership by the users of the productive property
through worker cooperative; or commonly owned by all of society with management
and control delegated to those who operate/use the means of production.
Management and control over the activities of enterprises is based on self-
management and self-governance, with equal power-relations in the workplace to
maximize occupational autonomy. A socialist form of organization would
eliminate controlling hierarchies so that only a hierarchy based on technical
knowledge in the workplace remains. Every member would have decision-making
power in the firm and would be able to participate in establishing its overall
policy objectives. The policies/goals would be carried out by the technical
specialists that form the coordinating hierarchy of the firm, who would
establish plans or directives for the work community to accomplish these goals.
However, the economies of the former Socialist states, excluding SFR
Yugoslavia, were based on bureaucratic, top-down administration of economic
directives and micromanagement of the worker in the workplace inspired by
capitalist models of scientific management. As a result, socialists have argued
that they were not socialist due to the lack of equal power-relations in the
workplace, the presence of a new "elite", and because of the commodity
production that took place in these economies. These economic and social
systems have been classified as being either "Bureaucratic collectivist",
"State capitalist" or "Deformed workers' states", the exact nature of the USSR
"et al" remains unresolved within the socialist movement Socialist economic
planning. Economic planning is a mechanism for the allocation of economic
inputs and decision-making based on direct allocation, in contrast to the
market mechanism, which is based on indirect allocation. An economy based on
economic planning appropriates its resources as needed, so that allocation
comes in the form of internal transfers rather than market transactions
involving the purchasing of assets by one government agency or firm by another.
Decision-making is carried out by workers and consumers on the enterprise-
level. Economic planning is not synonymous with the concept of a "command
economy", which existed in the Soviet Union, and was based on a highly
bureaucratic administration of the entire economy in accordance to a
comprehensive plan formulated by a central planning agency, which specified
output requirements for productive units and tried to micromanage the decisions
and policies of enterprises. The command economy is based on the organizational
model of a capitalist firm, but applies it to the entire economy. Various
advocates of economic planning have been staunch critics of command economies
and centralized planning. For example, Leon Trotsky believed that central
planners, regardless of their intellectual capacity, operated without the input
and participation of the millions of people who participate in the economy and
understand the local conditions and rapid changes in the economy. Therefore,
central planners would be unable to effectively coordinate all economic
activity because they lacked this informal information. Economic planning in
socialism takes a different form than economic planning in capitalist mixed
economies (such as Dirigisme, Central banking and Indicative planning); in the
former case planning refers to production of use-value directly (planning of
production), while in the latter case planning refers to the planning of
capital accumulation in order to stabilize or increase the efficiency of this
process. Normative aspects. The goal of socialist economics is to neutralize
capital (or, in the case of market socialism, to subject investment and capital
to social planning), to coordinate the production of goods and services to
directly satisfy demand (as opposed to market-induced needs), and to eliminate
the business cycle and crisis of overproduction that occur as a result of an
economy based on capital accumulation and private property in the means of
production. Socialists generally aim to achieve greater equality in decision-
making and economic affairs, grant workers greater control of the means of
production and their workplace, and to eliminate exploitation by directing the
surplus value to employees. Free access to the means of subsistence is a
requisite for liberty, because it ensures that all work is voluntary and no
class or individual has the power to coerce others into performing alienating
work. The ultimate goal for Marxist socialists is the emancipation of labor
from alienating work, and therefore freedom from having to perform such labor
to receive access to the material necessities for life. It is argued that
freedom from necessity would maximize individual liberty, as individuals would
be able to pursue their own interests and develop their own talents without
being coerced into performing labor for others (the power-elite or ruling class
in this case) via mechanisms of social control, such as the labor market and
the state. The stage of economic development in which this is possible is
contingent upon advances in the productive capabilities of society. This
advanced stage of social relations and economic organization is called "pure
communism". Economic value in socialism. Socialist economic theories base the
value of a good or service on its use value, rather than its cost of production
(labor theory of value) or its exchange value (Marginal Utility). Other
socialist theories, such as mutualism and market socialism, attempt to apply
the labor theory of value to socialism, so that the price of a good or service
is adjusted to equal the amount of labor time expended in its production. The
labor-time expended by each worker would correspond to labor credits, which
would be used as a currency to acquire goods and services. Market socialists
that base their models on neoclassical economics, and thus marginal utility,
such as Oskar Lange and Abba Lerner, have proposed that publicly owned
enterprises set their price to equal marginal cost, thereby achieving pareto
efficiency. Anarcho-communism as defended by Peter Kropotkin and Errico
Malatesta rejected the labor theory of value and exchange value iself,
advocated a gift economy and to base distribution on need. Socialist economies
in practice. Although a number of economic systems have existed with various
socialist attributes, or have been deemed socialist by their proponents, almost
all of the economic systems listed below have largely retained elements of
capitalism such as wage labor, the accumulation of capital, and commodity
production. Nonetheless, various elements of a socialist economy have been
implemented or experimented with in various economies throughout history.
Various forms of socialist organizational attributes have existed as minor
modes of production within the context of a capitalist economy throughout
history — examples of this include cooperative enterprises in a capitalist
economy, and the emerging free-software movement based on social peer-to-peer
production. Centrally planned economies. A centrally planned economy combines
public ownership of the means of production with centralised state planning.
This model is usually associated with the Soviet-style command economy. In a
centrally planned economy, decisions regarding the quantity of goods and
services to be produced are planned in advance by a planning agency. The
planning process was based around material balances — balancing economic
inputs with planned output targets for the planning period. Although nominally
a "centrally planned" economy, in reality formulation of the plan took place on
a more local level of the production process as information was relayed from
enterprises to planning ministries. Aside from the USSR and Eastern bloc
economies, this economic model was also utilized by the People's Republic of
China, Socialist Republic of Vietnam, Republic of Cuba and North Korea. Dispute
that the Soviet model is socialism. Various scholars and political economists
have criticized the claim that the centrally planned economy, and specifically,
the Soviet model of economic development, constitutes a form of socialism. They
argue that the Soviet economy was structured upon the accumulation of capital
and the extraction of surplus value from the working class by the planning
agency in order to reinvest this surplus into the economy — and to distribute
to managers and senior officials, indicating the Soviet Union (and other
Soviet-style economies) were state capitalist economies. More fundamentally,
these economies are still structured around the dynamic of capitalism: the
accumulation of capital and production for profit (as opposed to being based on
production for use — the defining criterion for socialism), and have not yet
transcended the system of capitalism but are in fact a variation of capitalism
based on a process of state-directed accumulation. Other socialist critics
point to the lack of socialist social relations in these economies —
specifically the lack of self-management, a bureaucratic elite based on
hierarchical and centralized powers of authority, and the lack of genuine
worker control over the means of production — leading them to conclude that
they were not socialist but either bureaucratic collectivism or state
capitalism. Trotskyists argue they are neither socialist nor capitalist — but
are deformed workers' states. This analysis is consistent with Lenin's April
Theses, which stated that the goal of the Bolshevik revolution was "not" the
introduction of socialism, which could only be established on a worldwide
scale, but was intended to bring production and the state under the control of
the Soviets of Workers' Deputies. Furthermore, these "Communist states" often
don't claim to have achieved socialism in their countries; on the contrary,
they claim to be "building" and working toward the establishment of socialism
in their countries. For example, the preamble to the Socialist Republic of
Vietnam's constitution states that Vietnam only entered a transition stage
between capitalism and socialism after the country was re-unified under the
Communist party in 1976, and the 1992 Constitution of the Republic of Cuba
states that the role of the Communist Party is to "guide the common effort
toward the goals and construction of socialism". This view is challenged by
Stalinists and their followers, who claim that socialism was established in the
Soviet Union after Joseph Stalin came to power and instituted the system of
five year plans. Joseph Stalin introduced the theory of Socialism in one
country, which argued that socialism can be built in a single country, despite
existing in a global capitalist economic system. Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics. The Soviet Union and some of its European satellites aimed for a
fully centrally planned economy. They dispensed almost entirely with private
ownership over the means of production. Workers were still, however,
effectively paid a wage for their labour. Some believe that according to
Marxist theory this should have been a step towards a genuine workers' state.
However, some Marxists consider this a misunderstanding of Marx's views of
historical materialism, and his views of the process of socialization. Post-
Soviet reforms. After the dissolution of the Soviet Union and the Eastern bloc,
many of the remaining socialist states presiding over centrally planned
economies began introducing reforms that shifted their economies away from
centralized planning. The Republic of Cuba, under the leadership of Raul
Castro, has begun to encourage co-operatives and self-employment in a move to
reduce the central role of state enterprise and state management over the
economy, with the goal of building a co-operative form of socialism. Vietnam
adopted an economic model it formally titled the "socialist-oriented market
economy". This economic system is a form of mixed-economy consisting of state,
private, co-operative and individual enterprises coordinated by the market
mechanism. This system is intended to be transitional stage in the development
of socialism. People's Republic of China. China embraced a socialist planned
economy after the Communist victory in its Civil War. Private property and
private ownership of capital were abolished, and various forms of wealth made
subject to state control or to workers' councils. The Chinese economy broadly
adopted a similar system of production quotas and full employment by fiat to
the Russian model. The Great Leap Forward saw a remarkably large-scale
experiment with rapid collectivisation of agriculture, and other ambitious
goals. Results were less than expected, (e.g., there were food shortages and
mass starvation) and the program was abandoned after three years. In recent
decades China has opened its economy to foreign investment and to market-based
trade, and has continued to experience strong economic growth. It has carefully
managed the transition from a planned socialist economy to a market economy,
officially referred to as the "socialist commodity market economy", which has
been likened to capitalism by some outside observers. As a result, centralized
economic planning has little relevance in China today. The current Chinese
economic system is characterized by state ownership combined with a strong
private sector that privately owned enterprises that generate about 33%
(People's Daily Online 2005) to over 50% of GDP in 2005, with a BusinessWeek
article estimating 70% of GDP, a figure that might be even greater considering
the Chengbao system. Some western observers note that the private sector is
likely underestimated by state officials in calculation of GDP due to its
propensity to ignore small private enterprises that are not registered. Most of
the state and private sectors of economy are governed by free market practices,
including a stock exchange for trading equity. The free-market is the
arbitrator for most economic activity, which is left to the management of both
state and private firms. A significant amount of privately owned firms exist,
especially in the consumer service sector. The state sector is concentrated in
the 'commanding heights' of the economy with a growing private sector engaged
primarily in commodity production and light industry. Centralized directive
planning based on mandatory output requirements and production quotas has been
superseded by the free-market mechanism for most of the economy and directive
planning is utilized in some large state industries. A major difference from
the old planned economy is the privatization of state institutions. 150 state-
owned enterprises remain and report directly to the central government, most
having a number of subsidiaries. By 2008, these state-owned corporations have
became increasingly dynamic largely contributing to the increase in revenue for
the state. The state-sector led the economic recovery process and increased
economic growth in 2009 after the financial crises. This type of economic
system is defended from a Marxist perspective which states that a socialist
planned economy can only be possible after first establishing the necessary
comprehensive commodity market economy, letting it fully develop until it
exhausts its historical stage and gradually transforms itself into a planned
economy. Proponents of this model distinguish themselves from market socialists
who believe that economic planning is unattainable, undesirable or ineffective
at distributing goods, viewing the market as the solution rather than a
temporary phase in development of a socialist planned economy. The Socialist
Republic of Vietnam has pursued similar economic reforms, though less
extensive, which have resulted in what is officially called a Socialist-
oriented market economy, a mixed economy where the state plays a dominant role
intended to be a transitional phase in establishment of a socialist economy.
Social Democratic Mixed Economies. Many of the industrialized, open countries
of Western Europe experimented with one form of social democratic mixed
economies or another during the 20th century. These include Britain (mixed
economy and welfare state) from 1945 to 1979, France (state capitalism and
indicative planning) from 1945 to 1982 under dirigisme, Sweden (social
democratic welfare state) and Norway (state capitalist mixed economy) to the
present. They can be regarded as social democratic experiments, because they
universally retained a wage-based economy and private ownership and control of
the decisive means of production. State capitalism. Various state capitalist
economies, which consist of large commercial state enterprises that operate
according to the laws of capitalism and pursue profits, have evolved in
countries that have been influenced by various elected socialist political
parties and their economic reforms. While these policies and reforms did not
change the fundamental aspect of capitalism, and non-socialist elements within
these countries supported or often implemented many of these reforms
themselves, the result has been a set of economic institutions that were at
least partly influenced by socialist ideology. Singapore. Singapore pursued a
state-led model of economic development under the People's Action Party, which
initially adopted a Leninist approach to politics and a broad socialist model
of economic development. The PAP was initially a member of the Socialist
International. Singapore's economy is dominated by state-owned enterprises and
government-linked companies through Temasek Holdings, which generate 60% of
Singapore's GDP. The state also provides substantial public housing, free
education, health and recreational services, as well as comprehensive public
transportation. Today Singapore is often characterized as having a state
capitalist economy that combines economic planning with the free-market. While
government-linked companies generate a majority of Singapore's GDP, moderate
state planning in the economy has been reduced in recent decades. India. After
gaining independence from Britain, India adopted a broadly socialist-inspired
approach to economic growth. Like other countries with a democratic transition
to a mixed economy, it did not abolish private property in capital. India
proceeded by nationalizing various large privately run firms, creating state-
owned enterprises and redistributing income through progressive taxation in a
manner similar to social democratic Western European nations than to planned
economies such as the USSR or China. Today India is often characterized as
having a free-market economy that combines economic planning with the free-
market. It did however adopt a very firm focus on national planning with a
series of broad Five-Year Plans. Paris Commune. The Paris Commune was
considered to be a prototype mode of economic and political organization for a
future socialist society by Karl Marx. Private property in the means of
production was abolished so that individuals and co-operative associations of
producers owned productive property and introduced democratic measures where
elected officials received no more in compensation than the average worker and
could be recalled at any time. Social ownership and peer-to-peer production.
Various forms of socialist organization based on co-operative decision making,
workplace democracy and in some cases, production directly for use, have
existed within the broader context of the capitalist mode of production since
the Paris Commune. New forms of socialist institutional arrangements began to
take form at the end of the 20th century with the advancement and proliferation
of the internet and other tools that allow for collaborative decision-making.
Michel Bauwens identifies the emergence of the open software movement and peer-
to-peer production as an emergent alternative mode of production to the
capitalist economy that is based on collaborative self-management, common
ownership of resources, and the (direct) production of use-values through the
free cooperation of producers who have access to distributed capital. Commons-
based peer production generally involves developers who produce goods and
services with no aim to profit directly, but freely contribute to a project
relying upon an open common pool of resources and software code. In both cases,
production is carried out directly for use — software is produced solely for
their use-value. Wikipedia, being based on collaboration and cooperation and a
freely associated individuals, has been cited as a template for how socialism
might operate. This is a modern example of what the Paris Commune — a
template for possible future organization — was to Marx in his time.
Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Yugoslavia pursued a socialist
economy based on autogestion or worker-self management. Rather than
implementing a centrally planned economy, Yugoslavia developed a market
socialist system where enterprises and firms were socially owned rather than
publicly owned by the state. In these organizations, the management was elected
directly by the workers in each firm, and were later organized according to
Edvard Kardelj's theory of associated labor. Self-managed enterprises. The
Mondragon Corporation, a federation of cooperatives in the Basque region of
Spain, organizes itself as an employee-owned, employee-managed enterprise.
Similar styles of decentralized management, which embrace cooperation and
collaboration in place of traditional hierarchical management structures, have
been adopted by various private corporations such as Cisco Systems, inc. But
unlike Mondragon, Cisco remains firmly under private ownership. More
fundamentally, employee-owned, self-managed enterprises still operate within
the broader context of capitalism and are subject to the accumulation of
capital and profit-loss mechanism. Anarchist Spain. The Spanish Revolution was
a workers' social revolution that began during the outbreak of the Spanish
Civil War in 1936 and resulted in the widespread implementation of anarchist
and more broadly socialist organizational principles throughout various
portions of the country for two to three years, primarily Catalonia, Aragon,
Andalusia, and parts of the Levante. Much of Spain's economy was put under
worker control; in anarchist strongholds like Catalonia, the figure was as high
as 75%, but lower in areas with heavy Communist Party influence, as the Soviet-
allied party actively resisted attempts at collectivization enactment.
Factories were run through worker committees, agrarian areas became
collectivised and run as libertarian communes. Even places like hotels, barber
shops, and restaurants were collectivized and managed by their workers. Sam
Dolgoff estimated that over 10 million people participated directly or at least
indirectly in the Spanish Revolution, which he claimed "came closer to
realizing the ideal of the free stateless society on a vast scale than any
other revolution in history." History of socialist economic thought. Values of
"socialism" have roots in pre-capitalist institutions such as the religious
communes, reciprocal obligations, and communal charity of Mediaeval Europe, the
development of its economic theory primarily reflects and responds to the
monumental changes brought about by the dissolution of feudalism and the
emergence of specifically capitalist social relations. As such it is commonly
regarded as a movement belonging to the modern era. Many socialists have
considered their advocacy as the preservation and extension of the radical
humanist ideas expressed in Enlightenment doctrine such as Jean-Jacques
Rousseau's "Discourse on Inequality", Wilhelm von Humboldt's "Limits of State
Action", or Immanuel Kant's insistent defense of the French Revolution.
Capitalism appeared in mature form as a result of the problems raised when an
industrial factory system requiring long-term investment and entailing
corresponding risks was introduced into an internationalized commercial
(mercantilist) framework. Historically speaking, the most pressing needs of
this new system were an assured supply of the elements of industry – land,
elaborate machinery, and labour – and these imperatives led to the
commodification of these elements. According to influential socialist economic
historian Karl Polanyi's classic account, the forceful transformation of land,
money and especially labour into commodities to be allocated by an autonomous
market mechanism was an alien and inhuman rupture of the pre-existing social
fabric. Marx had viewed the process in a similar light, referring to it as part
of the process of "primitive accumulation" whereby enough initial capital is
amassed to begin capitalist production. The dislocation that Polyani and others
describe, triggered natural counter-movements in efforts to re-embed the
economy in society. These counter-movements, that included, for example, the
Luddite rebellions, are the incipient socialist movements. Over time such
movements gave birth to or acquired an array of intellectual defenders who
attempted to develop their ideas in theory. As Polanyi noted, these counter-
movements were mostly reactive and therefore not full-fledged socialist
movements. Some demands went no further than a wish to mitigate the capitalist
market's worst effects. Later, a full socialist program developed, arguing for
systemic transformation. Its theorists believed that even if markets and
private property could be tamed so as not to be excessively "exploitative", or
crises could be effectively mitigated, capitalist social relations would remain
significantly unjust and anti-democratic, suppressing universal human needs for
fulfilling, empowering and creative work, diversity and solidarity. Within this
context socialism has undergone four periods: the first in the 19th century was
a period of utopian visions (1780s-1850s); then occurred the rise of
revolutionary socialist and Communist movements in the 19th century as the
primary opposition to the rise of corporations and industrialization
(1830–1916); the polarisation of socialism around the question of the Soviet
Union, and adoption of socialist or social democratic policies in response
(1916–1989); and the response of socialism in the neo-liberal era (1990- ).
As socialism developed, so did the socialist system of economics. Utopian
socialism. The first theories which came to hold the term "socialism" began to
be formulated in the late 18th century, and were termed "socialism" early in
the 19th century. The central beliefs of the socialism of this period rested on
the exploitation of those who labored by those who owned capital or rented land
and housing. The abject misery, poverty and disease to which laboring classes
seemed destined was the inspiration for a series of schools of thought which
argued that life under a class of masters, or "capitalists" as they were then
becoming to be called, would consist of working classes being driven down to
subsistence wages. (See Iron law of wages). Socialist ideas found expression in
utopian movements, which often formed agricultural communes aimed at being
self-sufficient on the land. These included many religious movements, such as
the Shakers in America. Utopian socialism had little to offer in terms of a
systematic theory of economic phenomena. In theory, economic problems were
dissolved by a utopian society which had transcended material scarcity. In
practice, small communities with a common spirit could sometimes resolve
allocation problems. Socialism and classical political economy. The first
organized theories of socialist economics were significantly impacted by
classical economic theory, including elements in Adam Smith, Robert Malthus and
David Ricardo. In Smith there is a conception of a common good not provided by
the market, a class analysis, a concern for the dehumanizing aspects of the
factory system, and the concept of rent as being unproductive. Ricardo argued
that the renting class was parasitic. This, and the possibility of a "general
glut", an over accumulation of capital to produce goods for sale rather than
for use, became the foundation of a rising critique of the concept that free
markets with competition would be sufficient to prevent disastrous downturns in
the economy, and whether the need for expansion would inevitably lead to war.
Socialist political economy before Marx. A key early socialist theorist of
political economy was Pierre-Joseph Proudhon. He was the most well-known of
nineteenth century mutualist theorists and the first thinker to refer to
himself as an anarchist. Others were: Technocrats like Henri de Saint Simon,
agrarian radicals like Thomas Spence, William Ogilvie and William Cobbett;
anti-capitalists like Thomas Hodgskin; communitarian and utopian socialists
like Robert Owen, William Thompson and Charles Fourier; anti-market socialists
like John Gray and John Francis Bray; the Christian mutualist William
Batchelder Greene; as well as the theorists of the Chartist movement and early
proponents of syndicalism. The first advocates of socialism promoted social
leveling in order to create a meritocratic or technocratic society based upon
individual talent. Count Henri de Saint-Simon was the first individual to coin
the term "socialism". Simon was fascinated by the enormous potential of science
and technology, which led him to advocate a socialist society that would
eliminate the disorderly aspects of capitalism and which would be based upon
equal opportunities. Simon advocated a society in which each person was ranked
according to his or her capacities and rewarded according to his or her work.
This was accompanied by a desire to implement a rationally organized economy
based on planning and geared towards large-scale scientific and material
progress, which embodied a desire for a semi-planned economy. Other early
socialist thinkers were influenced by the classical economists. The Ricardian
socialists, such as Thomas Hodgskin and Charles Hall, were based on the work of
David Ricardo and reasoned that the equilibrium value of commodities
approximated producer prices when those commodities were in elastic supply, and
that these producer prices corresponded to the embodied labor. The Ricardian
socialists viewed profit, interest and rent as deductions from this exchange-
value. Das Kapital. Karl Marx employed systematic analysis in an ambitious
attempt to elucidate capitalism's contradictory laws of motion, as well as to
expose the specific mechanisms by which it exploits and alienates. He radically
modified classical political economic theories. Notably, the labor theory of
value that had been worked upon by Adam Smith and David Ricardo, was
transformed into his characteristic "law of value" and used for the purpose of
revealing how commodity fetishism obscures the reality of capitalist society.
His approach, which Engels would call "scientific socialism", would stand as
the branching point in economic theory: in one direction went those who
rejected the capitalist system as fundamentally anti-social, arguing that it
could never be harnessed to effectively realize the fullest development of
human potentialities wherein "the free development of each is the condition for
the free development of all.". Das Kapital is one of the many famous incomplete
works of economic theory: Marx had planned four volumes, completed two, and
left his collaborator Engels to complete the third. In many ways the work is
modelled on Adam Smith's "Wealth of Nations", seeking to be a comprehensive
logical description of production, consumption and finance in relation to
morality and the state. Anarchist economics. Anarchist economics is the set of
theories and practices of economics and economic activity within the political
philosophy of anarchism. Pierre Joseph Proudhon was involved with the Lyons
mutualists and later adopted the name to describe his own teachings. Mutualism
is an anarchist school of thought that originates in the writings of Pierre-
Joseph Proudhon, who envisioned a society where each person might possess a
means of production, either individually or collectively, with trade
representing equivalent amounts of labor in the free market. Integral to the
scheme was the establishment of a mutual-credit bank that would lend to
producers at a minimal interest rate, just high enough to cover administration.
Mutualism is based on a labor theory of value that holds that when labor or its
product is sold, in exchange, it ought to receive goods or services embodying
"the amount of labor necessary to produce an article of exactly similar and
equal utility". Receiving anything less would be considered exploitation, theft
of labor, or usury. Collectivist anarchism (also known as anarcho-collectivism)
is a revolutionary doctrine that advocates the abolition of the state and
private ownership of the means of production. Instead, it envisions the means
of production being owned collectively and controlled and managed by the
producers themselves. Once collectivization takes place, workers' salaries
would be determined in democratic organizations based on the amount of time
they contributed to production. These salaries would be used to purchase goods
in a communal market. Collectivist anarchism is most commonly associated with
Mikhail Bakunin, the anti-authoritarian sections of the First International,
and the early Spanish anarchist movement. Anarchist communism is a theory of
anarchism which advocates the abolition of the state, private property, and
capitalism in favor of common ownership of the means of production, direct
democracy and a horizontal network of voluntary associations and workers'
councils with production and consumption based on the guiding principle: "from
each according to ability, to each according to need". Unlike mutualism,
collectivist anarchism and marxism, anarcho-communism as defended by Peter
Kropotkin and Errico Malatesta rejected the labor theory of value altogether,
instead advocating a gift economy and to base distribution on need. Anarchist
communism as a coherent, modern economic-political philosophy was first
formulated in the Italian section of the First International by Carlo Cafiero,
Emilio Covelli, Errico Malatesta, Andrea Costa and other ex-Mazzinian
Republicans. Out of respect for Mikhail Bakunin, they did not make their
differences with collectivist anarchism explicit until after Bakunin's death.
By the early 1880s, most of the European anarchist movement had adopted an
anarchist communist position, advocating the abolition of wage labour and
distribution according to need. Ironically, the "collectivist" label then
became more commonly associated with Marxist state socialists who advocated the
retention of some sort of wage system during the transition to full communism.
After Marx. Marx's work sharpened the existing differences between the
revolutionary and non-revolutionary socialists. Non-revolutionary socialists
took inspiration from the work of John Stuart Mill, and later Keynes and the
Keynesians, who provided theoretical justification for (potentially very
extensive) state involvement in an existing market economy. According to the
Keynesians, if the business cycle could be solved by national ownership of key
industries and state direction of their investment, class antagonism would be
effectively tamed; a compact would be formed between labour and the
capitalists. There would be no need for revolution; instead Keynes looked to
the eventual "euthenasia of the rentier" sometime in the far future. Joan
Robinson and Michael Kalecki employed Keynesian insights to form the basis of a
critical post-Keynesian economics that at times went well beyond liberal
reformism. Many original socialist economic ideas would also emerge out of the
trade union movement (see Guild Socialism). In the wake of Marx, "Marxist"
economists developed many different, sometimes contradictory tendencies. Some
of these tendencies were based on internal disputes about the meaning of some
of Marx's ideas, including the 'Law of Value' and his crisis theory. Other
variations were elaborations that subsequent theorists made in light of real
world developments. For example the monopoly capitalist school saw Paul A.
Baran and Paul Sweezy attempt to modify Marx's theory of capitalist
development, which was based upon the assumption of price competition, to
reflect the evolution to a stage where both economy and state were subject to
the dominating influence of giant corporations. World-systems analysis, would
restate Marx's ideas about the worldwide division of labour and the drive to
accumulate from the holistic perspective of capitalism's historical development
as a global system. Accordingly, Immanuel Wallerstein, writing in 1979,
maintained that "There are today no socialist systems in the world-economy any
more than there are feudal systems because there is only "one" world-system. It
is a world-economy and it is by definition capitalist in form. Socialism
involves the creation of a new kind of world-system, neither a redistributive
world-empire nor a capitalist world-economy but a socialist world-government. I
don't see this projection as being in the least utopian but I also don't feel
its institution is imminent. It will be the outcome of a long social struggle
in forms that may be familiar and perhaps in very few forms, that will take
place in "all" the areas of the world-economy." Meanwhile other notable strands
of reformist and revolutionary socialist economics sprung up that were either
only loosely associated with Marxism or wholly independent. Thorsten Veblen is
widely credited as the founder of critical institutionalism. His idiosyncratic
theorizing included acidic critiques of the inefficiency of capitalism,
monopolies, advertising, and the utility of conspicuous consumption. Some
institutionalists have addressed the incentive problems experienced by the
Soviet Union. Critical institutionalists have worked on the specification of
incentive-compatible institutions, usually based on forms of participatory
democracy, as a resolution superior to allocation by an autonomous market
mechanism. Another key socialist, closely related to Marx, Keynes, and Gramsci,
was Piero Sraffa. He mined classical political economy, particularly Ricardo,
in an attempt to erect a value theory that was at the same time an explanation
of the normal distribution of prices in an economy, as well that of income and
economic growth. A key finding was that the net product or surplus in the
sphere of production was determined by the balance of bargaining power between
workers and capitalists, which was in turn subject to the influence of non-
economic, presumably social and political factors. The mutualist tradition
associated with Proudhon also continued, influencing the development of
libertarian socialism, anarchist communism, syndicalism and distributivism. In
the real world, revolutionary socialists were confronted by the necessity of
running an economy, and generally a war economy, and developed ideas and
practice in response to the situations they found themselves in. Criticisms.
Criticism of socialist economics comes from market economists, including the
classicals, neoclassicals and Austrians, as well as from some anarchist
economists. Besides this, some socialist economic theories are criticized by
other socialists. Libertarian socialist, mutualist, and market socialist
economists, for example, criticize centralized economic planning and propose
participatory economics and decentralized socialism. Market economists
generally criticise socialism for eliminating the free market and its price
signals, which they consider necessary for rational economic calculation. They
also consider that it causes lack of incentive. They believe that these
problems lead to a slower rate of technological advance and a slower rate of
growth of GDP. Austrian school economists, such as Friedrich Hayek and Ludwig
Von Mises, have argued that the elimination of private ownership of the means
of production would inevitably create worse economic conditions for the general
populace than those that would be found in market economies. They argue that
without the price signals of the market, it is impossible to calculate
rationally how to allocate resources. Mises called this the economic
calculation problem. Polish economist Oskar Lange and Abba Lerner rebutted
Mises' argument by developing the Lange Model during the Economic calculation
debate. The Lange model states that an economy in which all production is
performed by the state, where there is a functioning price mechanism, has
similar properties to a market economy under perfect competition, in that it
achieves Pareto efficiency. The neoclassical view is that there is a lack of
incentive, not a lack of information in a planned economy. They argue that
within a socialist planned economy there is a lack of incentive to act on
information. Therefore, the crucial missing element is not so much information
as the Austrian school argued, as it is the motivation to act on information.
