Socialist realism Socialist realism is a style of realistic art which was
developed in the Soviet Union and became a dominant style in other socialist
countries. Socialist realism is a teleologically-oriented style having its
purpose the furtherance of the goals of socialism and communism. Although
related, it should not be confused with social realism, a broader type of art
that realistically depicts subjects of social concern. Unlike social realism,
socialist realism often glorifies the roles of the meek and working class and
the struggle for its emancipation. Soviet Union. In conjunction with the
Socialist Classical style of architecture, Socialist realism was the officially
approved type of art in the Soviet Union for nearly sixty years. All material
goods and means of production belonged to the community as a whole; this
included means of producing art, which were also seen as powerful propaganda
tools. During the October Revolution of 1917, the Bolsheviks established an
institution called Proletkult (the Proletarian Cultural and Enlightenment
Organizations) which sought to put all arts into the service of the
dictatorship of the proletariat. In the early years of the Soviet Union,
Russian and Soviet artists embraced a wide variety of art forms under the
auspices of Proletkult. Revolutionary politics and radical non-traditional art
forms were seen as complementary. In art, Constructivism flourished. In poetry,
the nontraditional and the avant-garde were often praised. This, however, was
rejected by some members of the Communist party, who did not appreciate modern
styles such as Impressionism and Cubism, since these movements existed before
the revolution and were thus associated with "decadent bourgeois art."
Socialist realism was, to some extent, a reaction against the adoption of these
"decadent" styles. It was thought that the non-representative forms of art were
not understood by the proletariat and could therefore not be used by the state
for propaganda. Alexander Bogdanov argued that the radical reformation of
society to Communist principles meant little if any bouregeois art would prove
useful; some of his more radical followers advocated the destruction of
libraries and museums. Lenin rejected this philosophy, deplored the rejection
of the beautiful because it was old, and explicitly described art as needing to
call on its heritage: "Proletarian culture must be the logical development of
the store of knowledge mankind has accumulated under the yoke of capitalist,
landowner, and bureaucratic society." Modern art styles appeared to refuse to
draw upon this heritage, thus clashing with the long realist tradition in
Russia and rendering the art scene complex. Even in Lenin's time, a cultural
bureaucracy began to restrain art to fit propaganda purposes. Socialist realism
became state policy in 1932 when Soviet leader Joseph Stalin promulgated the
decree "On the Reconstruction of Literary and Art Organizations". Accordingly,
the Moscow and Leningrad Union of Artists was established in 1932, which
brought the history of post-revolutionary art to a close. The epoch of Soviet
art began. In Leningrad well-known artist and art teacher Kuzma Petrov-Vodkin
was elected the first president of the Union of Artists. This choice laid down
the foundation of the lasting development of the Leningrad Union of Artists and
Academy of Arts as a unified creative body. In 1931-2, the early emphasis on
the "little man" and the anonymous laboring masses gave way to the "hero of
labor", derived from the people but set apart by the scale of his deeds.
Writers were explicitly enjoined to develop "heroization." This reflected a
call for romantic art, which reflected the ideal rather than the realistic.
Furthermore, it should show one clear and unambiguous meaning. The first
exhibition organized by the Leningrad Union of Artists took place in 1935. Its
participants – Piotr Buchkin, Rudolf Frentz, Alexander Samokhvalov, Isaak
Brodsky, Kuzma Petrov-Vodkin, Kazimir Malevich, Nikolai Dormidontov, Mikhail
Avilov among them – became the founding fathers of the Leningrad school while
their works formed one of its richest layers and the basis of the largest
museum collections of Soviet painting of the 1930-1950s. In 1932, the Leningrad
Institute of Proletarian Visual Arts was transformed into the Institute of
Painting, Sculpture and Architecture (since 1944 named Ilya Repin). The 15-year
period of constant reformation of the country’s largest art institute came to
an end. Thus, basic elements of the Leningrad school – namely, a higher art
education establishment of a new type and a unified professional union of
Leningrad artists, were created by the end of 1932. In 1934 Isaak Brodsky, a
disciple of Ilya Repin was appointed director of the National Academy of Arts
and the Leningrad Institute of Painting, Sculpture and Architecture. Brodsky
invited distinguished painters and pedagogues to teach at the Academy, namely
Konstantin Yuon, Pavel Naumov, Boris Ioganson, Semion Abugov, Pavel
Shillingovsky, Dmitry Kardovsky, Alexander Osmerkin, Nikolai Radlov, Yevgeny
Lansere, Alexander Lubimov, Rudolf Frentz, Nikolai Petrov, Victor Sinaisky,
Vasily Shukhaev, Dmitry Kiplik, Nikolai Punin, Vasily Meshkov, Mikhail
Bernshtein, Efim Cheptsov, Ivan Bilibin, Matvey Manizer, Piotr Buchkin, Anna
Ostroumova-Lebedeva, Alexander Karev, Leonid Ovsyannikov, Sergei Priselkov,
Ivan Stepashkin, Konstantin Rudakov and others. Art exhibitions of 1935–1940
disprove the claims that artistic life of the period was suppressed by the
ideology and artists submitted entirely to what was then called ‘social
order’. A great number of landscapes, portraits, genre paintings exhibited at
the time pursued purely technical purposes and were thus ostensibly free from
any ideology. Genre painting was also approached in a similar way. In the post-
war period between the mid-fifties and sixties, the Leningrad school of
painting was approaching its vertex. New generations of artists who had
graduated from the Academy (Repin Institute of Arts) in the 1930s–50s were in
their prime. They were quick to present their art, they strived for experiments
and were eager to appropriate a lot and to learn even more. Their time and
contemporaries, with all its images, ideas and dispositions found it full
expression in portraits by Lev Russov, Victor Oreshnikov, Boris Korneev, Leonid
Steele, Oleg Lomakin, Semion Rotnitsky, Vladimir Gorb, Samuil Nevelshtein,
Engels Kozlov, in landscapes by Nikolai Timkov, Vladimir Ovchinnikov, Sergei
Osipov, Alexander Semionov, Arseny Semionov, Vasily Golubev, Nikolai Galakhov,
Dmitry Maevsky, in genre paintings by Nikolai Pozdneev, Yuri Neprintsev, Yevsey
Moiseenko, Andrey Milnikov, Nina Veselova, Mikhail Trufanov, Yuri Tulin,
Mikhail Natarevich, and others. In 1957, the first all-Russian Congress of
Soviet artists took place in Moscow. In 1960, the all-Russian Union of Artists
was organized. Accordingly, these events influenced the art life in Moscow,
Leningrad and the provinces. The scope of experimentation was broadened; in
particular, this concerned the form and painterly and plastic language. Images
of youths and students, rapidly changing villages and cities, virgin lands
brought under cultivation, grandiose construction plans being realized in
Siberia and the Volga region, great achievements of Soviet science and
technology became the chief topics of the new painting. Heroes of the time –
young scientists, workers, civil engineers, physicians – were made the most
popular heroes of paintings. In this period, life provided artists with plenty
of thrilling topics, positive figures and images. Legacy of many great artists
and art movements became available for study and public discussion again. This
greatly broadened artists’ understanding of the realist method and widened
its possibilities. It was the repeated renewal of the very conception of
realism that made this style dominate Russian art throughout its history.
Realist tradition gave rise to many trends of contemporary painting, including
painting from nature, "severe style" painting and decorative art. However,
during this period impressionism, postimpressionism, cubism and expressionism
also had their fervent adherents and interpreters. The Union of Soviet Writers
was founded to control the output of authors, and the new policy was rubber-
stamped at the Congress of Socialist Writers in 1934. It was enforced
ruthlessly in all spheres of artistic endeavour. Artists who strayed from the
official line were severely punished. Form and content were often limited, with
erotic, religious, abstract, surrealist and expressionist art being forbidden.
Formal experiments, including internal dialogue, stream of consciousness,
nonsense, free-form association and cut-up were also disallowed. This was
either because they were "decadent", unintelligible to the proletariat or
counter-revolutionary. In response to the 1934 Congress in Russia, the most
important American writers of the left gathered in the First American Writers
Congress of 26, 27 April 1935 in Chicago, at the meetings which were supported
by Stalin. Waldo David Frank was its first president See the League of American
Writers which was backed by the Communist Party USA. A number of the novelists
balked at the control, and the League broke up at the invasion of the Soviet
Union by German forces. The restrictions were relaxed somewhat after Stalin's
death in 1953, but the state still kept a tight rein on personal artistic
expression. This caused many artists to choose to go into exile, for example
the Odessa Group from the city of that name. Independent-minded artists that
remained continued to feel the hostility of the state. In 1974, for instance, a
show of unofficial art in a field near Moscow was broken up, and the artworks
destroyed with a water cannon and bulldozers (see Bulldozer Exhibition).
Mikhail Gorbachev's policy of glasnost and perestroika facilitated an explosion
of interest in alternative art styles in the late 1980s, but socialist realism
remained in limited force as the official state art style until as late as
1991. It was not until after the fall of the Soviet Union that artists were
finally freed from state censorship. Other socialist states. After the Russian
Revolution, socialist realism became an international literary movement.
Socialist trends in literature were established in the 1920s in Germany,
France, Czechoslovakia, and Poland. Writers who helped develop socialist
realism in the West included Louis Aragon, Johannes Becher, and Pablo Neruda.
The doctrine of socialist realism in other People's Republics, was legally
enforced from 1949 to 1956. It involved all domains of visual and literary
arts, though its most spectacular achievements were made in the field of
architecture, considered a key weapon in the creation of a new social order,
intended to help spread the communist doctrine by influencing citizens'
consciousness as well as their outlook on life. During this massive
undertaking, a crucial role fell to architects perceived not as merely
engineers creating streets and edifices, but rather as "engineers of the human
soul" who, in addition to extending simple aesthetics into urban design, were
to express grandiose ideas and arouse feelings of stability, persistence and
political power. Today, arguably the only countries still focused on these
aesthetic principles are North Korea, Laos, and to some extent Vietnam. The
People's Republic of China occasionally reverts to socialist realism for
specific purposes, such as idealised propaganda posters to promote the Chinese
space program. Socialist realism had little mainstream impact in the non-
Communist world, where it was widely seen as a totalitarian means of imposing
state control on artists. The former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
was an important exception among the communist countries, because after the
Tito-Stalin split in 1948, it abandoned socialist realism along with other
elements previously imported from the Soviet system and allowed greater
artistic freedom. Miroslav Krleža, one of the leading Yugoslav intellectuals,
held a speech at the Third Congress of the Writers Alliance of Yugoslavia in
Ljubljana in 1952, which is considered a turning point in the Yugoslav
denouncement of dogmatic socialist realism. Roots. The initial tendencies
toward socialist realism date from the mid-19th century. They include
revolutionary literature in Great Britain (the poetry of the Chartist
movement), Germany (Herwegh, Freiligrath, and G. Weerth), and France (the
literature of the Paris Commune and Pottier's "Internationale.") Socialist
realism emerged as a literary method in the early 20th century in Russia,
especially in the works of Gorky. It was also apparent in the works of writers
like Kotsiubinsky, Rainis, Akopian, and Edvoshvili. Following Gorky, writers in
several countries combined the realistic depiction of life with the expression
of a socialist world view. They included Barbusse, Andersen Nexø, and John
Reed. The political aspect of socialist realism was, in some respects, a
continuation of pre-Soviet state policy. Censorship and attempts to control the
content of art did not begin with the Soviets, but were a long-running feature
of Russian life. The Tsarist government also appreciated the potentially
disruptive effect of art and required all books to be cleared by the censor.
Writers and artists in 19th century Imperial Russia became quite skilled at
evading censorship by making their points without spelling it out in so many
words. However, Soviet censors were not easily evaded. Socialist realism had
its roots in neoclassicism and the traditions of realism in Russian literature
of the 19th century that described the life of simple people. It was
exemplified by the aesthetic philosophy of Maxim Gorky. The work of the
Peredvizhniki (The Itinerants (or Wanderers), a Russian realist movement of the
late 19th / early 20th centuries), Jacques-Louis David and Ilya Yefimovich
Repin were notable influences. Socialist Realism was a product of the Soviet
system. Whereas in market societies professional artists earned their living
selling to, or being commissioned by rich individuals or the Church, in Soviet
society not only was the market suppressed, there were few if any individuals
able to patronise the arts and only one institution – the State itself. Hence
artists became state employees. As such the State set the parameters for what
it employed them to do. What was expected of the artist was that he/she be
formally qualified and to reach a standard of competence. However, whilst this
rewarded basic competency, it did not provide an incentive to excel, resulting
in a stultification similar to that in other spheres of Soviet society. Even
so, many of the art works glorifying Joseph Stalin and other leaders are hardly
in keeping with these ideals and the charge that art be understandable to the
whole people negated the notion of the avant garde and discouraged experimental
approaches. The realism achieved was often technically very good and similar to
many Western works intended as magazine illustration or bookjackets, rather
than High Art. The partisan quality tends to attract the most criticism, in
that it often predominated to the exclusion of the other tenets, so that
paintings of peasants feasting after bumper harvests was neither real nor
typical of the lot of many of those depicted, especially in the Ukrainian
Famine. Characteristics. Socialist realism held that successful art depicts and
glorifies the proletariat's struggle toward socialist progress. The Statute of
the Union of Soviet Writers in 1934 stated that socialist realism Its purpose
was to elevate the common worker, whether factory or agricultural, by
presenting his life, work, and recreation as admirable. In other words, its
goal was to educate the people in the goals and meaning of Communism. The
ultimate aim was to create what Lenin called "an entirely new type of human
being": "New Soviet Man". Stalin described the practitioners of socialist
realism as "engineers of souls". The "realism" part is important. Soviet art at
this time aimed to depict the worker as he truly was, carrying his tools. In a
sense, the movement mirrors the course of American and Western art, where the
everyday human being became the subject of the novel, the play, poetry, and
art. The proletariat was at the center of communist ideals; hence, his life was
a worthy subject for study. This was an important shift away from the
aristocratic art produced under the Russian tsars of previous centuries, but
had much in common with the late-19th century fashion for depicting the social
life of the common people. In practice, this entailed realistic depictions of
objects, so that ordinary people could understand; a theater could not use a
box to represent a chair. The artist could not, however, portray life just as
he saw it; because everything that reflected poorly on Communism had to be
omitted, and indeed, people who were not simply good or evil could not be used
as characters. All characters were poured into a heroic mold, sometimes termed
heroic realism. This reflected a call for heroic and romantic art, which
reflected the ideal rather than the realistic. Art was filled with health and
happiness; paintings teemed with busy industrial and agricultural scenes, and
sculptures depicted workers, sentries, and schoolchildren. Compared to the
eclectic variety of 20th century Western art, socialist realism often resulted
in a fairly bland and predictable range of artistic products (indeed, Western
critics wryly described the principles of socialist realism as "girl meets
tractor"). Painters would depict happy, muscular peasants and workers in
factories and collective farms; during the Stalin period, they also produced
numerous heroic portraits of the dictator to serve his cult of personality.
Industrial and agricultural landscapes were popular subjects, glorifying the
achievements of the Soviet economy. Novelists were expected to produce
uplifting stories in a manner consistent with the Marxist doctrine of
dialectical materialism. Composers were to produce rousing, vivid music that
reflected the life and struggles of the proletariat. It was argued that mere
photographic replication of facts was merely "naturalism", while socialist
realism was distinguished by a will and purpose on part of the artist, and his
recognition of these facts as part of a vision of the whole. Even diarists
would attempt to fit their accounts of their daily lives into suitable purpose-
driven, future-oriented accounts. Socialist realism thus demanded close
adherence to party doctrine, and has often been criticized as detrimental to
the creation of true, unfettered art or as being little more than a means to
censor artistic expression. Vsevolod Kochetov is one of the typical
representatives who rigorously applied those doctrines even in 1960s and early
1970s. Czesław Miłosz, writing in the introduction to Sinyavsky's "On
Socialist Realism", describes the products of socialist realism as "inferior",
ascribing this as necessarily proceeding from the limited view of reality
permitted to creative artists. Not all Marxists accepted the necessity of
socialist realism (Marx's, Engels' and Trotsky's views on art and culture were
very liberal and may have balked at the propagandism of Socialist realism
themselves). Its establishment as state doctrine in the 1930s had rather more
to do with internal Communist Party politics than classic Marxist imperatives.
The Hungarian Marxist essayist Georg Lukács criticized the rigidity of
socialist realism, proposing his own "critical realism" as an alternative.
However, such critical voices were a rarity until the 1980s. Notable works and
artists. Maxim Gorky's novel "Mother" is usually considered to have been the
first socialist realist novel. Gorky was also a major factor in the school's
rapid rise, and his pamphlet, "On Socialist Realism", essentially lays out the
needs of Soviet art. Other important works of literature include Fyodor
Gladkov's "Cement" (1925), Nikolai Ostrovsky's "How the Steel Was Tempered" and
Mikhail Sholokhov's two volume epic, "Quiet Flows the Don" (1934) and "The Don
Flows Home to the Sea" (1940). Yury Krymov's novel "Tanker "Derbent"" (1938)
portrays Soviet merchant seafarers being transformed by the Stakhanovite
movement. Martin Andersen Nexø developed socialist realism in his own way. His
creative method was characterized by a combination of publicistic passion, a
critical view of capitalist society, and a steadfast striving to bring reality
into accord with socialist ideals. The novel "Pelle, the Conqueror" is
considered to be a classic of socialist realism. The novel "Ditte, Daughter of
Man" had a working-class woman as its heroine. He battled against the enemies
of socialism in the books "Two Worlds", and "Hands Off!". The novels of Louis
Aragon such as "The Real World" depicts the working class as a rising force of
the nation. He published two books of documentary prose, "The Communist Man".
In the collection of poems "A Knife in the Heart Again", Aragon criticizes the
penetration of American imperialism into Europe. The novel "The Holy Week"
depicts the artist's path toward the people against a broad social and
historical background. Hanns Eisler composed many workers' songs, marches, and
ballads on current political topics such as "Song of Solidarity", "Song of the
United Front", and "Song of the Comintern". He was a founder of a new style of
revolutionary song for the masses. He also composed works in larger forms such
as "Requiem for Lenin". Eisler's most important works include the cantatas
"German Symphony", "Serenade of the Age" and "Song of Peace". Eisler combines
features of revolutionary songs with varied expression. His symphonic music is
known for its complex and subtle orchestration. Closely associated with the
rise of the labor movement was the development of the revolutionary song, which
was performed at demonstrations and meetings. Among the most famous of the
revolutionary songs are "The Internationale" and "Warszawianka". Notable songs
from Russia include "Boldly, Comrades, in Step", "Workers' Marseillaise", and
"Rage, Tyrants". Folk and revolutionary songs influenced the Soviet mass songs.
The mass song was a leading genre in Soviet music, especially during the 1930s
and the war. The mass song influenced other genres, including the art song,
opera, and film music. The most popular mass songs include Dunaevsky's "Song of
the Homeland", Blanter's "Katiusha", Novikov's "Hymn of Democratic Youth of the
World", and Aleksandrov's "Sacred War". In the early 1930s, Soviet filmmakers
applied socialist realism in their work. Notable films include "Chapaev", which
shows the role of the people in the history-making process. The theme of
revolutionary history was developed in films such as "The Youth of Maxim", by
Grigori Kozintsev and Leonid Trauberg, "Shchors" by Dovzhenko, and "We are from
Kronstadt" by E. Dzigan. The shaping of the new man under socialism was a theme
of films such as "A Start Life" by N. Ekk, "Ivan" by Dovzhenko, "Valerii
Chkalov" by M. Kalatozov and the film version of "Tanker "Derbent"" (1941).
Some films depicted the part of peoples of the Soviet Union against foreign
invaders: "Alexander Nevsky" by Eisenstein, "Minin and Pozharsky" by Pudvokin,
and "Bogdan Khmelnitsky" by Savchenko. Soviet politicians were the subjects in
films such as Yutkevich's trilogy of movies about Lenin. Socialist realism was
also applied to Hindi films of the 1940s and 1950s. These include Chetan
Anand's "Neecha Nagar" (1946), which won the Grand Prize at the 1st Cannes Film
Festival, and Bimal Roy's "Two Acres of Land" (1953), which won the
International Prize at the 7th Cannes Film Festival. The painter Aleksandr
Deineka provides a notable example for his expressionist and patriotic scenes
of the Second World War, collective farms, and sports. Yuri Pimenov, Boris
Ioganson and Geli Korzev have also been described as "unappreciated masters of
twentieth-century realism". Another well-known practitioner was Fyodor
Pavlovich Reshetnikov. Consequences. Socialist realism had a significant impact
on art in Russia and elsewhere. In Russia, the works of authors such as Gorky,
Mayakovsky, Sholokhov, Tvardovsky, Fadeyev, Leonov, and many other writers
became established classics, achieved worldwide renown, and have become a firm
part of the world's cultural heritage. Socialist realism was credited for
helping talent to develop and art to flourish in many forms and for making it
more accessible to the masses. Mikhail Bulgakov wrote his work, "The Master and
Margarita", in secret, despite earlier successes such as "White Guard". In 1936
Dmitri Shostakovich was criticized for his opera Lady Macbeth of Mtsensk in a
Pravda article entitled "Muddle instead of Music". Sergei Prokofiev too found
his musical language increasingly restricted in the years after his permanent
return to the Soviet Union in 1935 (especially in the wake of the 1948 Zhdanov
Decree), although he continued to compose until the end of his life five years
later. The political doctrine behind socialist realism also underlay the
pervasive censorship of Communist societies. Apart from obvious political
considerations that saw works such as those of George Orwell being banned,
access to foreign art and literature was also restricted on aesthetic grounds.
Bourgeois art and all forms of experimentalism and formalism were denounced as
decadent, degenerate and pessimistic, and therefore anti-Communist in
principle. The works of James Joyce were particularly harshly condemned. The
net effect was that it was not until the 1980s that the general public in the
Communist countries were able to freely access many works of Western art and
literature.
