Socialism and social democracy in Canada Democratic socialism and Social
democracy have been, along with liberalism and conservatism, a political force
in Canada. The radical years. Canada's socialist movement is believed to have
originated in Western Canada. The Winnipeg General Strike of 1919 and Great
Depression (1929–1939) are considered to have fuelled socialism in Canada.
The Socialist Party of Canada was the first Canadian based left-wing party.
Founded in 1904, it collapsed as a national party in 1924. During the Great
Depression, the Communist Party of Canada experienced a brief surge in
popularity, becoming influential in various labour unions and electing a single
Member of Parliament, Fred Rose. The Communist Party of Canada was created in
Guelph, Ontario in 1921 by a group of Marxist activists led by William
Moriarty. During the early years of their existence the party's membership
faced persecution and arrest for their political activities. In 1935 the
Communists gained notoriety by organizing a massive march of unemployed workers
known as the On-to-Ottawa Trek and before that organized the young inmates of
the relief camps into the Relief Camp Workers' Union to resist the poor
conditions of the camps. The On-to-Ottawa Trek never made it to Ottawa, instead
it ended with the Regina Riot of July 1, 1935. The trek and the living
conditions in the government's "relief camps" helped to discredit Conservative
Prime Minister R. B. Bennett, leading to his defeat at the hands of the
Liberals in 1935. After the trek the communists were instrumental in organizing
over 1,448 Canadians to fight in the Spanish Civil War. Joined by volunteers of
other political stripes, the Canadian contingent known as the Mackenzie-
Papineau Battalion joined the International Brigades (a coalition of volunteers
from many countries) to fight for the elected leftwing government of the Second
Spanish Republic against the fascist supported insurgency of General Francisco
Franco. The "Mac-Paps" fought bravely in many battles but were forced to leave
Spain in 1938 by Prime Minister Juan Negrín López along with the other
foreign volunteers as it became clear that the war was lost. Of the nearly
1,500 Canadians known to have fought in Spain, 721 were verified as having lost
their lives. The most famous Canadian to serve in the Mackenzie–Papineau
Battalion was Dr. Norman Bethune, a surgeon who would invent the world's first
mobile medical unit. Dr. Bethune would later be killed during the Second Sino-
Japanese War, while aiding the Communist Party of China. Today he is a national
hero in the People's Republic of China and is remembered as being a friend of
Chinese leader Mao Zedong. By the end of the Second World War, the Communist
Party began to lose its momentum. Its only elected federal representative, Fred
Rose, was accused of being a Soviet spy. Rose was expelled from parliament,
arrested for four years, and then followed at every job site by the Royal
Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP). He eventually left for Poland with the
intention of returning to clear his name, but had his Canadian citizenship
revoked in 1957. "CCF to Victory", the rise of democratic socialism. By a wide
margin, the Co-operative Commonwealth Federation (CCF), a democratic socialist
political party from the Prairies with its origins in the Christian left and
the social gospel, became the most influential socialist party in Canada. The
CCF gained support in the Prairies as well as from many labour unions. Led by
Tommy Douglas, the CCF was elected to power during the 1944 Saskatchewan
election. Douglas governed Saskatchewan until 1961. Today his party remains an
important force in the politics of the province. The CCF also emerged as the
official opposition in British Columbia during the election of 1941 and in
Ontario during the province's 1943 election. At the federal level, opinion
polls initially indicated a dramatic surge in support for the CCF prior to the
1945 federal election. Although in the end it only translated into modest gains
for the party, it is widely believed to have influenced the early steps taken
by Prime Minister William Lyon Mackenzie King in introducing the welfare state.
The CCF and the early democratic socialist movement is seen, by some political
scientists (such as Gad Horowitz), as mainly a Christian and European Canadian
movement. In 1961, the CCF joined with the Canadian Labour Congress to form the
New Democratic Party (NDP). The NDP is more moderate and social-democratic than
its predecessor, the CCF. The Regina Manifesto of the CCF called for abolishing
capitalism, while the NDP merely wants to reform capitalism. They are generally
perceived as being responsible for the creation of universal healthcare,
pensions, a human rights code and for the development of Canada's social safety
net in general. In the past the NDP has formed provincial governments in
British Columbia, Yukon Territory, Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Ontario and Nova
Scotia. At present Manitoba and Nova Scotia have New Democratic governments,
while the NDP is the second largest party in Saskatchewan and British Columbia.
At the federal level the NDP has held strong influence over various minority
governments, in particular a Liberal minority led by Pierre Trudeau from 1972-
1974. During this period the NDP was successful in forcing the government to
create a state-owned oil company, called Petro Canada. The NDP has also held
influence over other Liberal-led minority governments during the Lester B.
Pearson government (1963-1968) and the Paul Martin government (2004-2006).
Their self stated goal is to one day form a federal government on their own and
introduce social-democratic policies. In the province of Quebec the NDP has
been considerably less popular, but recently, in the May 2nd, 2011 election,
elected a record number of Members of Parliament for a total of 59 of the 75
elected members coming from Quebec. The party is now the Official Opposition.
For most of the late 20th century the strongest social-democratic party in
Quebec has been the sovereigntist Parti Québécois. Like the NDP, the Parti
Québécois officially considers itself to be "social democratic". Radical
versions of socialism. Many socialists in Canada have attempted to organize
outside of the framework of parliamentary politics, to pursue conceptions of
socialism that are more radical than the social-democratic politics of either
the CCF or the NDP. Some of the radical socialist organizations operating in
Canada today include the International Socialists (Canada), the New Socialist
Group, the Communist League (Canada), Autonomy & Solidarity, and the London
Project for a Participatory Society, among others. Socialist and social
democratic parties in Canada. Historical parties. Parties that have held seats
in the Canadian House of Commons and provincial legislatures.
