Socialist state A socialist state (or socialist republic) generally refers to
any state that is constitutionally dedicated to the construction of a socialist
society. It is closely related to the political strategy of "state socialism",
a set of ideologies that believe a socialist economy can be established through
government policies. Alternatively, the term Worker's state is used to
distinguish between a state where the working-class controls the machinery of
government but has not yet established a socialist economy. Both of these
concepts are distinguished from a socialist government, which generally refers
to a liberal democratic state presided over by an elected majority socialist
party that is not, and does not necessarily have to be, pursuing the
development of socialism, and where the state apparatus is not constitutionally
bound to the construction of a socialist system. Non-statist socialists such as
anarcho-socialists, libertarian socialists and council communists reject the
concept of a "socialist state" altogether, believing that the modern state is a
byproduct of capitalism and cannot be used, or is not required, to establish a
socialist system. They reason that a socialist state is antithetical to
socialism, and that socialism will emerge spontaneously from the grass-roots
level in an evolutionary manner, developing its own unique political and
economic institutions for a highly organized stateless society. The phrase
"Socialist state", or "Communist states" in the West, is widely used by
Leninists and Marxist–Leninists in reference to a state under the control of
a vanguard party that is organizing the economic, social and political affairs
of said state toward the construction of socialism. This often includes at
least the "commanding heights" of the economy to be nationalised, usually
operated according to a plan of production at least in the major productive and
social spheres. Under the Leninist definition, the socialist state presides
over a state capitalist economy structured upon state-directed accumulation of
capital with the goal of building up the country's productive forces and
promoting worldwide socialist revolution, with the eventual long-term goal of
building a socialist economy. Most theories assume widespread democracy, and
some assume workers' democratic participation at every level of economic and
state administration, while varying in the degree to which economic planning
decisions are delegated to public officials and administrative specialists.
States where democracy is lacking yet the economy is largely in the hands of
the state are termed by orthodox Trotskyist theories "workers' states" but not
socialist states using the terms "degenerated" or "deformed" workers' states.
In the early 21st century, right leaning commentators, especially in the United
States, have come to use the term "socialist state" to describe states which
provide welfare provisions, such as healthcare and unemployment benefits,
despite the economic basis of such states being privatized and operated for
profits. Marxist concept of a socialist state. Henri de Saint-Simon, a pre-
Marxian socialist, understood that the nature of the state would change under
socialism from that of political rule (via coercion) over people to a
scientific administration of things and a direction of processes of production;
specifically, the state would become a coordinating entity for production as
opposed to a mechanism for political control. Karl Marx understood the state to
be an instrument of the class rule, dominated by the interests of the ruling
class in any mode of production. Although Marx never referred to a "socialist
state", he argued that the working-class would have to take control of the
state apparatus and machinery of government in order to transition out of
capitalism and to socialism. This transitional stage would involve working-
class interests dominating the government policy (the "Dictatorship of the
proletariat"), in the same manner that capitalist-class interests dominate
government policy under capitalism. Fredrick Engels argued that the state under
socialism is not a "government of people, but the administration of things",
and thus would not be a state in the traditional sense of the term. One of the
most influential modern visions of a socialist state was based on the Paris
Commune, in which the workers and poor took control of the city of Paris in
1871 in reaction to the Franco-Prussian War. Karl Marx described the Paris
Commune as the prototype for a revolutionary government of the future, "the
form at last discovered" for the emancipation of the proletariat. Friedrich
Engels noted that "all officials, high or low, were paid only the wages
received by other workers... In this way an effective barrier to place-hunting
and careerism was set up". Commenting on the nature of the state, Engels
continued: "From the outset the Commune was compelled to recognize that the
working class, once come to power, could not manage with the old state
machine". In order not to be overthrown once having conquered power, Engels
argues, the working class "must, on the one hand, do away with all the old
repressive machinery previously used against it itself, and, on the other,
safeguard itself against its own deputies and officials, by declaring them all,
without exception, subject to recall at any moment." Such a state would be a
temporary affair, Engels argued. A new generation, he suggested, brought up in
"new and free social conditions", will be able to "throw the entire lumber of
the state on the scrap-heap." Leninist conception of a socialist state. The
Leninist conception of a socialist state is tied to Vladimir Lenin's theory of
the revolutionary party and democratic centralism. The objective of Marxism is
to build a mass workers' movement which can smash the capitalist state, replace
it with a revolutionary socialist workers' state based on workers councils, and
bring production under control by the worker's and peasants. According to
Lenin's April Theses, the goal of the revolution and vanguard party is not the
introduction of socialism, which could only be established on a worldwide
scale, but to bring production and the state under the control of the Soviets
of Workers' Deputies. Following the October revolution in Russia, the
Bolsheviks consolidated their power and sought to control and direct the social
and economic affairs of the state and broader Russian society in order to
safeguard against counterrevolutionary insurrection, foreign invasion, and to
promote socialist consciousness among the Russian population. These ideas were
adopted by Vladimir Lenin in 1917 just prior to the October Revolution in
Russia and published in "The State and Revolution", a central text for many
Marxists. With the failure of the worldwide revolution envisaged by Lenin and
Trotsky, the Civil War, and finally Lenin's death, war measures that were
deemed to be temporary, such as forced requisition of food and the lack of
democratic control, became permanent and a tool to boost Stalin's power,
leading to the emergence of Marxism–Leninism and Stalinism, as well as the
notion that socialism can be created and exist in a single state. Vladimir
Lenin argued that as socialism is replaced by communism, the state would
"wither away" as strong centralized control progressively reduces as local
communities gain more empowerment. As he put succinctly: "So long as the state
exists there is no freedom. When there is freedom, there will be no state."
Marxist–Leninist states. States run by Communist parties that adhere to
Marxism–Leninism, or some variation thereof, refer to themselves as
"socialist states". The Soviet Union was the first to proclaim itself a
"socialist state" in its 1936 Constitution and a subsequent 1977 Constitution.
Another well-known example is the People's Republic of China, which proclaims
itself to be a "socialist state" in its 1982 Constitution of the People's
Republic of China. In the West, such states are commonly known as "communist
states" (though they do not use this term to refer to themselves). These
"Communist states" often don't claim to have achieved socialism in their
countries; rather, they claim to be "building" and working toward the
establishment of socialism (and the development towards communism thereafter)
in their countries. For example, the preamble to the Socialist Republic of
Vietnam's constitution states that Vietnam only entered a transition stage
between capitalism and socialism after the country was re-unified under the
Communist party in 1976, and the 1992 Constitution of the Republic of Cuba
states that the role of the Communist Party is to "guide the common effort
toward the goals and construction of socialism". The Democratic People's
Republic of Korea (North Korea) used to be a Marxist-Leninist state. In 1972,
the country adopted a new constitution, which changed the state ideology to
""Juche"". Today, although no longer a "communist state", the DPRK remains a
constitutionally socialist state. Non-Leninist countries. Countries such as
Portugal (which states that one of the primary roles of the Constituent
Assembly is to open the way to socialist society), India and Algeria have used
the term "socialist" in their official name or constitution without claiming to
follow Communism or any of its derivatives. In such cases, the intended meaning
of "socialism" can vary widely, and sometimes the constitutional references to
socialism are left over from a previous period in the country's history. In the
case of many Middle-Eastern states, "socialism" was often used in reference to
an Arab-socialist/nationalist philosophy adopted by specific regimes, such as
that of Gamal Abdel Nasser and that of the various Ba'ath Parties. Examples of
countries using the word "socialist" in a non-communist sense in their names
include the "Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka". Countries with non-
Leninist/communist references to socialism in their constitutions include India
and Portugal. Post-war European countries. In the post-war period, when
nationalisation was relatively widespread, it was not uncommon for commentators
to describe some European countries as socialist states seeking to move their
countries toward socialism. When the Socialist Party was in power in France in
the post-war period, some commentators claimed that France was a socialist
country, although, as in the rest of Europe, the laws of capitalism still
operated fully and private enterprises dominated their economy. Mitterrand's
Government scheduled to nationalize all banks but this attempt faced opposition
of the European Economic Community. Economic interventionist and welfare
states. Conservative commentators have termed the 2008 bail-out of the banks,
"Socialism", suggesting that the USA and the UK have become socialist, but
these comments are dismissed by government spokespersons and socialists alike,
as the bailouts are more indicative of protectionism and/or interventionist
capitalism. Economic liberal (pro-capitalist) and socialist opponents of the
claim that improving welfare benefits or increasing state regulation of
financial activity makes a state "socialist" argue that the continued operation
of capitalist economics in states like the USA shows that a state with welfare
reforms is still a capitalist state, pointing to numerous forms of welfare
state capitalism such as the social market economy, Rhine capitalism and
Keynesian economics. While most socialists do not claim that welfare provision
makes a state socialist, various socialists nevertheless support welfare
provision within the capitalist state as a temporary means to improve the
conditions of the working class, independently of their advocacy for the
establishment of socialism. Ever since (and even before) Marx and Engels called
for "A heavy progressive or graduated income tax" and other reforms in the
Communist Manifesto in 1848, socialists have campaigned for welfare reforms of
various kinds, including for universal health and unemployment benefits to
alleviate the negative effects of capitalism on workers. However, in Marx's
time, some socialists, such as the German 'True Socialists' opposed calling on
the state to implement welfare reforms. They argued that welfare programs,
regulation and progressive taxation were policies initiated by capitalist
states (as opposed to being won from the capitalists as a result of the
pressure of the working class) in an attempt to "patch up" the ineffective
capitalist market economy, and were therefore attempts to treat the symptoms
but not the cause of the issues. The Communist Manifesto, however, declared
that this 'True' socialism, unintentionally "directly represented a reactionary
interest." Many socialists support both "positive" and "negative" welfare.
Positive welfare is the provision by the state of opportunities for people to
“help themselves”. Negative welfare is the provision by the state or other
institutions of a “safety net” or the distribution of benefits according to
some criteria, for those who have been failed by the capitalist system. By
implementing state or public ownership of the means of production and
establishing socialist democracy, socialists believe the need for negative
welfare - hand outs via redistribution - will disappear both because all
individuals would receive enough compensation or resources from their workplace
and because increasingly costs to the public at large, such as housing,
healthcare and education, would pass into social provision at no cost to the
individual. Marxists and socialists who advocate socialism argue that welfare
states and (modern) social democratic policies limit the incentive system of
the market by providing things such as minimum wages, unemployment insurance,
taxing profits and reducing the reserve army of labor, resulting in capitalists
have little incentive to invest; in essence, social welfare policies cripple
the capitalist system and its incentive system, the only solution being a
socialist economic system. Other socialists and Marxists criticize welfare
state programs as concessions made by the capitalist class in order to divert
the working and middle classes away from pursuing a completely new socialist
organization of the economy and society. They argue that welfare reforms had
historically been used for this purpose in Prussia by Otto von Bismarck to
ameliorate the impact of his anti-socialist laws, while others, such as
Frederick Engels argue that the campaigns of the Marxists in Germany forced
Bismarck to carry out reforms. Socialists perceive social welfare states with
modern social democratic policies, such as those in Sweden, to be capitalist
states. Social democratic Reformist Marxist Aneurin Bevan, Minister of Health
in the first post-war Labour government, who introduced the UK National Health
Service (NHS), also takes the view that welfare programmes, such as health care
which is free at the point of use for all, are concessions forced on capitalism
by the struggles of the working class and a "pure Socialism" embryo of the new
socialist society gestating within capitalist society (see section 'Post-war
European countries' above). In such conceptions (as in the example of the UK
NHS), the taxation to pay for these services is intended to be taken largely if
not entirely from the capitalist class, through a tax on corporation profits.
Those earning less than £50,000 ($43,000) in today's money (£500 then) only
paid 5.3% in tax the year after the NHS was introduced in the UK in 1948. These
Marxists take the view that welfare programmes should be defended and improved
with further nationalisations (such as, in the case of the health service, the
drug companies) which would increase the income to the state, while at the same
time campaigning for public ownership of the commanding heights of the economy
to eliminate capitalism and establish a socialist society in which poverty will
be eliminated. Establishing a socialist state by reformism or revolution.
Reformist socialists and Marxists, exemplified by Eduard Bernstein, take the
view that a socialist state will evolve out of political reforms won by the
struggle of the socialists. "The socialist movement is everything to me while
what people commonly call the goal of Socialism is nothing." These views are
considered a "revision" of Marxist thought. In this view, only in this way can
a socialist state be established. Controversy with the term. Because there are
several different branches of socialism, a country's claim to the label of
"socialist state" or "socialist republic" is almost always disputed by some
branch. Indeed, there are many socialists who strongly oppose certain (or all)
self-proclaimed socialist republics. Trotskyists, for instance, are
particularly known for their opposition to what they term «Stalinist states».
Within the socialist movement, a number of criticisms are maintained towards
the use of the term "socialist states" in relation to countries such as China
and previously of Soviet Union and, Eastern and Central European states before
what some term the 'collapse of Stalinism' in 1989. Democratic Socialists, left
communists, Anarchists and some Trotskyists claim that the so-called "socialist
states" or "people's states" were actually state capitalist and thus cannot be
called "socialist". Other Trotskyists, while agreeing that these states could
not be described as socialist, deny that they were state capitalist. They
support Trotsky's analysis of (pre-restoration) USSR as a workers' state that
had degenerated into a "monstrous" bureaucratic dictatorship which rested on a
largely nationalised industry run according to a plan of production, and
claimed that the former "Stalinist" states of Central and Eastern Europe were
deformed workers' states based on the same relations of production as USSR.
