Welfare Welfare is the provision of a minimal level of wellbeing and social
support for all citizens. In most developed countries, welfare is largely
provided by the government, in addition to charities, informal social groups,
religious groups, and inter-governmental organizations. In the end, this term
replaces "charity" as it was known for thousands of years, being the voluntary
act of providing for those who temporarily or permanently could not. Forms.
Welfare can take a variety of forms, such as monetary payments, subsidies and
vouchers, or housing. Welfare can be provided by governments, non-governmental
organizations, or a combination of the two. Welfare programs may be funded
directly by governments, or in social insurance models, by the members of the
Welfare scheme. Welfare systems differ from country to country, but Welfare is
commonly provided to individuals who are unemployed, those with illness or
disability, the elderly, those with dependent children, and veterans. A
person's eligibility for Welfare may also be constrained by means testing or
other conditions. Subsidy Subsidizing a good is one way of redistributing
wealth to the poor. It is money that is paid usually by a government to keep
the price of a product or service low or to help a business or organization to
continue to function. In a budget constraint between ‘all other goods’ and
a ‘subsidized good’, the maximum amount of ‘all other goods will remain
the same but the budget constraint will shift outward for the ‘subsidized
good' can lead to an over consumption of the good. Voucher A voucher is like a
subsidy that can only be consumed in a specific way like a school voucher or
section 8 housing. For instance, families who receive school vouchers may only
use them to send their children to schools to help pay tuition costs. Schools
then exchange the voucher for cash. Similarly, in section 8 housing, families
with this voucher can only use the voucher to pay a portion of their living
costs in specified units or in a private sector. In a budget constraint between
‘all other goods’ and a ‘voucher good’ our budget constraint will shift
out parallel to an amount equal to the amount of the voucher but the money we
have to spend on ‘all other goods’ remains capped at the same amount we had
to spend before the voucher. Voucher programs can make us worse off because of
the cap on our ability to spend on ‘all other goods’ our indifference
curves could limit us. Direct Cash This is straight cash with no restrictions
on how it can be consumed. Direct cash may cause greater budget constraint
because the recipient can spend the cash subsidy on all ‘other goods’ or on
a ‘subsidized good’. Direct cash increases the entire budget constraint and
shifts the indifference curves outward allowing us to maximize individual
utility. Provision and funding. Welfare may be provided directly by governments
or their agencies, by private organizations, or by a combination. Welfare may
be funded by governments out of general revenue, typically by way of
redistributive taxation. Social insurance-type Welfare schemes are funded on a
contributory basis by the members of the scheme. Contributions may be pooled to
fund the scheme as a whole, or reserved for the benefit of a particular member.
Participation in such schemes is either compulsory, or the program is
subsidized heavily enough that most eligible individuals choose to participate.
Examples of social insurance programs include the Social Security and Medicare
programs in the United States. History. In the Roman Empire, the first emperor
Augustus provided the 'congiaria' or corn dole for citizens who could not
afford to buy food. Social welfare was enlarged by the Emperor Trajan. Trajan's
program brought acclaim from many, including Pliny the Younger. In Jewish
tradition, charity (represented by tzedakah) is a matter of religious
obligation rather than benevolence. Contemporary charity is regarded as a
continuation of the Biblical Maaser Ani, or poor-tithe, as well as Biblical
practices, such as permitting the poor to glean the corners of a field and
harvest during the Shmita (Sabbatical year). Voluntary charity, along with
prayer and repentance, is believed to ameliorate the consequences of bad acts.
The Song dynasty (c.1000AD) government supported multiple forms of social
Welfare programs, including the establishment of retirement homes, public
clinics, and pauper's graveyards According to Robert Henry Nelson, "The
medieval Roman Catholic Church operated a far-reaching and comprehensive
Welfare system for the poor..." The concepts of Welfare and pension were put
into practice in the early Islamic law of the Caliphate as forms of "Zakat"
(charity), one of the Five Pillars of Islam, since the time of the Rashidun
caliph Umar in the 7th century. The taxes (including "Zakat" and "Jizya")
collected in the treasury of an Islamic government were used to provide income
for the needy, including the poor, elderly, orphans, widows, and the disabled.
According to the Islamic jurist Al-Ghazali (Algazel, 1058–1111), the
government was also expected to store up food supplies in every region in case
a disaster or famine occurred. (See Bayt al-mal for further information.) There
is relatively little statistical data on Welfare transfer payments before the
High Middle Ages. In the medieval period and until the Industrial Revolution,
the function of Welfare payments in Europe was principally achieved through
private giving or charity. In those early times, there was a much broader group
considered to be in poverty as compared to the 21st century. Early Welfare
programs in Europe included the English Poor Law of 1601, which gave parishes
the responsibility for providing Welfare payments to the poor. This system was
substantially modified by the 19th-century Poor Law Amendment Act, which
introduced the system of workhouses. It was predominantly in the late 19th and
early 20th centuries that an organized system of state Welfare provision was
introduced in many countries. Otto von Bismarck, Chancellor of Germany,
introduced one of the first Welfare systems for the working classes. In Great
Britain the Liberal government of Henry Campbell-Bannerman and David Lloyd
George introduced the National Insurance system in 1911, a system later
expanded by Clement Attlee. The United States did not have an organized Welfare
system until the Great Depression, when emergency relief measures were
introduced under President Franklin D. Roosevelt. Even then, Roosevelt's New
Deal focused predominantly on a program of providing work and stimulating the
economy through public spending on projects, rather than on cash payment.
Welfare systems. France. Solidarity is a strong value of the French Social
Protection system. The first article of the French Code of Social Security
describes the principle of solidarity. Solidarity is commonly comprehended in
relations of similar work, shared responsibility and common risks. Existing
solidarities in France caused the expansion of health and social security.
Germany. The Welfare state has a long tradition in Germany dating back to the
industrial revolution. Due to the pressure of the workers' movement in the late
19th century, Reichskanzler Otto von Bismarck introduced the first rudimentary
state social insurance scheme. Today, the social protection of all its citizens
is considered a central pillar of German national policy. 27.6 percent of
Germany's GDP is channeled into an all-embracing system of health, pension,
accident, longterm care and unemployment insurance, compared to 16.2 percent in
the US. In addition, there are tax-financed services such as child benefits
("Kindergeld", beginning at €184 per month for the first and second children,
€190 for the third and €215 for each child thereafter, until they attain 25
years or receive their first professional qualification), and basic provisions
for those unable to work or anyone with an income below the poverty line. Since
2005, reception of full unemployment pay (60-67% of the previous net salary)
has been restricted to 12 months in general and 18 months for those over 55.
This is now followed by (usually much lower) "Arbeitslosengeld II (ALG II)" or
"Sozialhilfe", which is independent of previous employment (Hartz IV concept).
Under ALG II, a single person receives €379 per month plus the cost of
'adequate' housing and health insurance. ALG II can also be paid partially to
supplement a low work income. Canada. Canada has a Welfare state in the
European tradition; however, it is not referred to as "Welfare", but rather as
"social programs". In Canada, "Welfare" usually refers specifically to direct
payments to poor individuals (as in the American usage) and not to healthcare
and education spending (as in the European usage). The Canadian social safety
net covers a broad spectrum of programs, and because Canada is a federation,
many are run by the provinces. Canada has a wide range of government transfer
payments to individuals, which totaled $145 billion in 2006. Only social
programs that direct funds to individuals are included in that cost; programs
such as medicare and public education are additional costs. Generally speaking,
before the Great Depression, most social services were provided by religious
charities and other private groups. Changing government policy between the
1930s and 1960s saw the emergence of a Welfare state, similar to many Western
European countries. Most programs from that era are still in use, although many
were scaled back during the 1990s as government priorities shifted towards
reducing debt and deficits. United States. The Welfare system in the United
States began in the 1930s, during the Great Depression. After the Great Society
legislation of the 1960s, people who were not elderly or disabled could receive
need-based aid from the federal government. Aid could include general Welfare
payments, healthcare through Medicaid, food stamps, and special payments for
pregnant women and young mothers. In 1968, 4.1% of families were headed by a
woman receiving Welfare assistance; by 1980, the percentage increased to 10%.
In 2008, 28.7 percent of the households headed by single women were considered
poor. The poverty rate for single-mother families in 2010 jumped to 40.7%
compared to 8.8% for married-couple families. In the 1970s, California was the
U.S. state with the most generous Welfare system. In 2012, the states with the
highest percentage of people using food stamps were Mississippi (20.7%), Oregon
(20.1%), New Mexico (19.8%), Tennessee (19.8%), and Michigan (19.7%).
California, with 12% of the U.S. population, has one-third of the nation's
welfare recipients. In 1996, the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity
Reconciliation Act changed the structure of Welfare payments and added new
criteria to states that received Welfare funding. After reforms, which
President Clinton said would "end Welfare as we know it," amounts from the
federal government were given out in a flat rate per state based on population.
Each state must meet certain criteria to ensure recipients are being encouraged
to work themselves out of Welfare. The new program is called Temporary
Assistance for Needy Families (TANF). It encourages states to require some sort
of employment search in exchange for providing funds to individuals, and
imposes a five-year lifetime limit on cash assistance. In FY 2009, white
families comprised 31.2% of TANF families, black families comprised 33.3%, and
28.8% were Hispanic. In a 2011 op-ed in "Forbes", Peter Ferrara stated that,
"The best estimate of the cost of the 185 federal means tested Welfare programs
for 2010 for the federal government alone is nearly $700 billion, up a third
since 2008, according to the Heritage Foundation. Counting state spending,
total Welfare spending for 2010 reached nearly $900 billion, up nearly one-
fourth since 2008 (24.3%)". According to the U.S. Census Bureau data released
September 13, 2011, the nation's poverty rate rose to 15.1% (46.2 million) in
2010, up from 14.3% (approximately 43.6 million) in 2009 and to its highest
level since 1993. In 2008, 13.2% (39.8 million) Americans lived in relative
poverty. Italy. The Italian welfare state's foundations were laid along the
lines of the corporatist-conservative model, or of its Mediterranean variant.
Later, in the 1960s and 1970s, increases in public spending and a major focus
on universality brought it on the same path as social-democratic systems. In
1978, a universalistic welfare model was introduced in Italy, offering a number
of universal and free services such as a National Health Fund. Sweden. Social
welfare in Sweden is made up of several organizations and systems dealing with
welfare. It is mostly funded by taxes, and executed by the public sector on all
levels of government as well as private organisations. It can be separated into
three parts falling under three different ministries; social welfare, falling
under the responsibility of Ministry of Health and Social Affairs; education,
under the responsibility of the Ministry of Education and Research and labour
market, under the responsibility of Ministry of Employment. Government pension
payments are financed through an 18.5% pension tax on all taxed incomes in the
country, which comes partly from a tax category called a public pension fee (7%
on gross income), and 30% of a tax category called employer fees on salaries
(which is 33% on a netted income). Since January 2001 the 18.5% is divided in
two parts: 16% goes to current payments, and 2.5% goes into individual
retirement accounts, which were introduced in 2001. Money saved and invested in
government funds, and IRAs for future pension costs, are roughly 5 times annual
government pension expenses (725/150). Japan. Social welfare, assistance for
the ill or otherwise disabled and for the old, has long been provided in Japan
by both the government and private companies. Beginning in the 1920s, the
government enacted a series of welfare programs, based mainly on European
models, to provide medical care and financial support. During the postwar
period, a comprehensive system of social security was gradually established.
Latin America. History. The 1980s marked a change in the structure of Latin
American social protection programs. Social protection embraces three major
areas: social insurance, financed by workers and employers; social assistance
to the population’s poorest, financed by the state; and labor market
regulations to protect worker rights. Although diverse, recent Latin American
social policy has tended to concentrate on social assistance. The 1980s had a
significant effect on social protection policies. Prior to the 1980s, most
Latin American countries focused on social insurance policies involving formal
sector workers, assuming that the informal sector would disappear with economic
development. The economic crisis of the 1980s and the liberalization of the
labor market led to a growing informal sector and a rapid increase in poverty
and inequality. Latin American countries did not have the institutions and
funds to properly handle such a crisis, both due to the structure of the social
security system, and to the previously implemented structural adjustment
policies (SAPs) that had decreased the size of the state. New Welfare programs
have integrated the multidimensional, social risk management, and capabilities
approaches into poverty alleviation. They focus on income transfers and service
provisions while aiming to alleviate both long- and short-term poverty through,
among other things, education, health, security, and housing. Unlike previous
programs that targeted the working class, new programs have successfully
focused on locating and targeting the very poorest. The impacts of social
assistance programs vary between countries, and many programs have yet to be
fully evaluated. According to Barrientos and Santibanez, the programs have been
more successful in increasing investment in human capital than in bringing
households above the poverty line. Challenges still exist, including the
extreme inequality levels and the mass scale of poverty; locating a financial
basis for programs; and deciding on exit strategies or on the long-term
establishment of programs. Critiques. Income transfers can be either
conditional or unconditional. There is no substantial evidence that conditional
transfers are more effective than unconditional ones. Conditionalities are
sometimes critiqued for being paternalistic and unnecessary. Current programs
have been built as short-term rather than as permanent institutions, and many
of them have rather short time spans (around five years). Some programs have
time frames that reflect available funding. One example of this is Bolivia’s
Bonosol, which is financed by proceeds from the privatization of utilities—an
unsustainable funding source. Some see Latin America’s social assistance
programs as a way to patch up high levels of poverty and inequalities, partly
brought on by the current economic system. Some opponents of Welfare argue that
it affects work incentives. They also argue that the taxes levied can also
affect work incentives. A good example of this would be the reform of the Aid
to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) program. Per AFDC, some amount per
recipeint is guaranteed. However, for every dollar the recipient earns the
monthly stipend is decreased by an equivalent amount. For most persons, this
reduces their incentive to work. This program was replaced by Temporary Aid to
Needy Families (TANF). Under TANF, people were required to actively seek
employment while receiving aid and they could only receive aid for a limited
amount of time. However, states can choose the amount of resources they will
devote to the program.
