Social mobility Social mobility is the movement of individuals or groups in
social position over time. It may refer to classes, ethnic groups, or entire
nations, and may measure health status, literacy, or education — but more
commonly it refers to individuals or families, and their change in income. It
also typically refers to vertical mobility—movement of individuals or groups
up (or down) from one socio-economic level to another, often by changing jobs
or marriage; but can also refer to horizontal mobility—movement from one
position to another within the same social level. Social mobility can be the
change in status between someone (or a group) and their parents/previous family
generations ("inter-generational"); or over the change during one's lifetime
("intra-generational"). It can be "absolute"—i.e. total amount of movement of
people between classes, usually over one generation (such as when education and
economic development raises the socio-economic level of a population); or
"relative" -- an estimation of the chance of upward (or downward) social
mobility of a member of one social class in comparison with a member from
another class. A higher level of intergenerational mobility is often considered
praiseworthy, and the sign of greater fairness, or equality of opportunity, in
a society. Mobility is enabled to a varying extent by economic capital,
cultural capital (such as higher education), human's capital (such as
competence and effort in labour), social capital (such as support from one's
social network), physical capital (such as ownership of tools, or the 'means of
production'), and symbolic capital (such as the worth of an official title,
status class, celebrity, etc.). In western modern states, examples of policy
issues are: taxation, welfare, education and public transport each exercising
great influence over the state. In other societies religious affiliation, caste
membership, or geographical location may be of central importance. The extent
to which a nation is open and meritocratic is influential, but an arbitrary
system of promotion can also lead to mobility: a society in which traditional
or religious caste systems dominate is unlikely to present the opportunity for
social mobility. The term is used in both sociology and economics. Inter- and
Intra-generational mobility. Intra-generational mobility ("within" a
generation) is defined as change in social status over a single life-time.
Inter-generational mobility ("across" generations) is defined as changes in
social status that occur from the parents' to the children's generation. These
definitions have proven particularly useful when analyzing how social status
changes from one time-period to another, and if a person's parents' social
status influences that of their own. Sociologists usually focus on
intergenerational mobility because it is easier to depict changes across
generations rather than within one. This information helps sociologists
determine whether social and economic inequality and equal opportunity in a
culture changes over time. Intra-generational mobility occurs when a person
strives to change his or her own social standing. In some societies, this type
of change is easier than in others. In social systems where people are divided
into castes or ethnic groups, social mobility is limited. Any persons born into
a certain caste or ethnic group will remain a member of that group for their
entire life. However, in cultures where social standing is determined by
factors that can change across generations, such as merit, education, skills,
abilities, actions or wealth, people can move up and down the social ladder.
Intra-generational mobility can move a person either higher or lower in the
social ladder. If a person starts at a low level, they may improve their status
by (for example) working hard, getting a better job, or becoming more
culturally sound, ( a value judgement expressing the dominant values of that
culture) to name a few possible approaches. Pierre Bourdieu describes three
types of capital that place a person in a certain social category. These are
economic capital, social capital, and cultural capital. Economic capital is
command over economic resources such as money and assets. Social capital is
resources one achieves based on group membership, relationships, networks of
influence, and support from other people. Cultural capital is any advantage a
person has that gives them a higher status in society, such as education,
skills, and any other form of knowledge. Usually, people with all three types
of capital have a high status in society. Inter-generational mobility occurs
across generations. This mobility is both merit- and non-merit-based. Ability
and hard work affect social mobility, but so do race, gender, luck, and
parents' wealth. Parents also help children make important connections with
people in order to expand their social network. Parents who can create social
capital for their children tend to increase their children's social mobility.
Research on American mobility published in 2006 and based on collecting data on
the economic mobility of families across generations looked at the probability
of reaching a particular income-distribution with regard to where their parents
were ranked. The study found that 42 percent of those whose parents were in the
bottom quintile ended up in the bottom quintile themselves, 23 percent of them
ended in the second quintile, 19 percent in the middle quintile, 11 percent in
the fourth quintile and 6 percent in the top quintile. These data indicate the
difficulty of upward intergenerational mobility. There is more
intergenerational mobility in Australia, Sweden, Norway, Finland, Germany,
Spain, France, and Canada than in th U.S. In fact, of affluent countries
studied, only Britain and Italy have lower intergenerational mobility than the
United States does (and they are basically even with the U.S.) We know less
about the long-term mobility of the top 1 percent, but all indications are that
people in this rarefied group usually don’t drop very far down the ladder.
Annette Lareau disusses child-raising in her book, "Unequal Childhoods: Class,
Race, and Family Life" (2003). She describes two different ways to raise
children: concerted cultivation and natural growth: These two different types
of childrearing can affect inter-generational mobility. Children who grow up
with a concerted cultivation style of childrearing learn from their parents how
to talk with adults as equals and negotiate to get favorable outcomes in any
situation. This skill helps them create powerful social networks, which can
improve their social standing. Children with natural growth accomplishment tend
to have a more difficult time improving their social standing. They lack the
social skills and sense of entitlement that children raised with the concerted
cultivation method have, and therefore are less likely to acquire good jobs
(and therefore, improve their social standing). Children who have been raised
with natural growth do learn to comply with authority figures, instead of
arguing with them, which gives them an advantage over concerted cultivated
children in certain fields of employment. However, those are generally the
entry-level fields (which pay people to follow orders and not to think) and are
therefore the lower-paying ones, whereas the middle-class concertedly
cultivated children's reasoning skills aid them in attaining the higher-paying,
higher-prestige white-collar jobs. Absolute and Relative Mobility. Absolute
mobility measures whether (and by how much) living standards in a society have
increased—often measured by what percentage of people have higher incomes
than their parents. Relative mobility refers to how likely children are to move
from their parents’ place in the income distribution. So, for example, if a
person’s income increases from $32,000 at the beginning of their career to
$36,000 a decade later, whereas most other people who began their work life
around the same time experienced a larger increase, that person has experienced
upward absolute mobility but downward relative mobility. The more absolute
mobility there is, the better off the population is than their parents, and
their children will consequently be better off than them. Relative mobility
refers to the fluidity of a society. If your family is poor, you have a decent
chance of moving up the relative income ladder. Because relative mobility
depends on one’s place in the distribution, it is a zero-sum phenomenon. In
other words, if one person moves up in relative terms, another by definition
must have moved down. In contrast, absolute mobility is not zero-sum. Although
both absolute and relative mobility are both forms of intragenerational
mobility, these two have very little to do with each other. High absolute
mobility rates can co-exist with highly unequal relative mobility chances.
Thus, you can have an economy with a lot of absolute mobility, and little
relative mobility or an economy with a lot of relative mobility, and little
absolute mobility. Social mobility is an act of moving from one social class to
another. The amount of movement up and down the class structure would indicate
the extent of social mobility prevalent in the society. The social mobility is
greatly influenced by the level of openness of the society. An open society is
the one where people attain their status primarily by their own efforts. The
extent of mobility may be taken as an index of meritocracy of a society
indicating how far talented individuals born into lower strata can move up the
socio-economic ladder; and vice versa, how far lazy rich people move down the
ladder. In this respect, social mobility is an important political issue,
particularly in countries committed to a liberal vision of equal opportunity
for all citizens. In this perspective industrial societies are mostly open
societies exhibiting high social mobility. Compared with them, pre-industrial
societies have mostly been found to be closed societies where there has been
low social mobility. People in such societies have been confined to their
ancestral occupations, and their social status has mostly been prescribed. The
movement of people up or down the social hierarchy can be looked at either
within one generation called intra-generational mobility or between generations
labeled as inter-generational mobility. Intra-generational mobility consists of
movement up and down the stratification system by members of a single
generation (the-social class in which you began life compared with your social
class at the end of your life). Inter-generational mobility consists of
movement up and down the stratification system by members of successive
generations of a family (your social class location compared with that of your
parents, for example). Comparison is usually made between social class status
of son and father. Mobility is functional. Open societies provide opportunities
to their members for the development of their talents and working toward their
individual fulfillment. At the same time a person can select the best person
for doing a particular job Rules of status: ascription and achievement.
Achieved status is a position gained based on merit, or achievement (used in an
open system). An open system describes a society with mobility between
different social classes. Individuals can move up or down in the social
rankings; this is unlike closed systems, where individuals are set in one
social position for life despite their achievements. Ascribed status is a
position based on who a person is, not what they can do (used in a closed
system). When this ascriptive status rule is used (Medieval Europe), people are
placed in a position based on personal traits beyond their control. Mobility is
much more frequent in countries that use achievement as the basis for status.
However, societies differ in the amount of mobility that occurs due to the
direction of structural changes in their overall status systems. The process by
which an individual "alters" the ascribed social status of their parents into
an achieved social status for themselves is called Social Transformation. The
ability of an individual to become wealthy out of poverty does "not"
necessarily indicate that there is social mobility in his or her society. Some
societies with low or nonexistent social mobility afford free individuals
opportunities to initiate enterprise and amass wealth, but wealth fails to
"buy" entry into a higher social class. In feudal Japan and Confucianist China,
wealthy merchants occupied the "lowest" ranks in society (at least in theory).
In pre-revolutionary France, a nobleman, however poor, was from the "second
estate" of society and thus superior, at least in theory, to a wealthy merchant
(from the "third estate"). Mobility regimes can be positive and/or an negative
sum. Structural mobility is mobility resulting from changes in the number and
kinds of jobs available in a society. Examples: Great Depression, many job
losses, the government and many people in need of major help. According to
sociologist John H. Goldthorpe, social mobility is normally seen in two ways.
The first being that it is a basic source of social "structuration." The second
is that the extent of mobility may be a strong indicator of the balance of
power and status within a society. Structural and exchange mobility. Structural
mobility is a type of forced vertical mobility that results from a change in
the distribution of statuses within a society, owing more to changes in society
itself than to individual efforts. It occurs when the demand for a particular
occupation reaches its maximum and more people are needed to trade-off. This
means, instead of positions reaching the maximum and more people being needed,
positions are dropped and someone else must step up to fill the position. When
ascriptive status is in play, there is not much exchange mobility occurring.
Upward and downward mobility. Upward social mobility is a change in a person's
social status resulting in that person rising to a higher position in their
status system. However, downward mobility implies a person's social status
falls to a lower position in their status system. A prime example of an
opportunity for upward mobility nowadays is in athletics. There is an
increasing number of minorities holding top executive positions in the NBA.
Transformative assets would also allow one to achieve a higher status in
society, as they increase wealth and provide for more opportunity. A
transformative asset could be a trust fund set up by family that allows one to
own a nice house in a nice neighborhood, instead of renting an apartment in a
run-down community. This type of move would allow the person to develop a new
circle of friends of the same economic status. Country comparison. Several
studies have been made comparing social mobility between developed countries.
One such study (“Do Poor Children Become Poor Adults?") found that of nine
developed countries, the United States and United Kingdom had the lowest
intergenerational vertical social mobility with about half of the advantages of
having a parent with a high income passed on to the next generation. The four
countries with the lowest "intergenerational income elasticity", i.e. the
highest social mobility, were Denmark, Norway, Finland, and Canada with less
than 20% of advantages of having a high income parent passed on to their
children. (see graph) Examples. Notable examples of social mobility include
Pierre Bérégovoy who started working at the age of 16 as a metal worker and
later became Prime Minister of France, Ramsay MacDonald the illegitimate son of
a farm labourer and a housemaid who became Prime Minister of the United
Kingdom, and Sir Joseph Cook, an Englishman who had no schooling and worked as
a coal miner at the age of nine and went on to become Prime Minister of
Australia. Socio-economic mobility in the US. At least five large studies in
recent years have found that vertical inter-generational mobility is lower in
America than in comparable nations, belief in America as a land of opportunity
not withstanding. Popular opinion. The American Dream Report, a study of the
Economic Mobility Project, found that Americans surveyed were more likely than
citizens of other countries to agree with statements like “People get
rewarded for intelligence and skill”, “People get rewarded for their
efforts”; and less likely to agree with statements like “Coming from a
wealthy family is ‘essential’ or ‘very important’ to getting ahead,”
“Income differences in my country are too large” or “It is the
responsibility of government to reduce differences in income.” While another
report found such beliefs to have gotten strong over the last few decades.
Comparisons with other countries. Along with the aforementioned “Do Poor
Children Become Poor Adults?" study The Economist also stated that "evidence
from social scientists suggests that American society is much `stickier` than
most Americans assume. Some researchers claim that social mobility is actually
declining." A German study corroborates these results. In spite of this low
mobility Americans surveyed had the highest belief in meritocracy among 27
nations surveyed. Examples. Popular examples of upward social mobility from
America include Abraham Lincoln and Bill Clinton, who were born into working-
class families yet achieved high political office in adult life. Benjamin
Franklin came from a modest background but became wealthy. Andrew Carnegie,
arrived in the U.S. as a poor immigrant and later became a steel tycoon.
Education factor. Wages and earnings correlate with education. A 2009 survey of
young adults who worked full-time throughout a full year, found the median
income of those without a high school diploma ($21,000) was below the poverty
level for a family of four ($22,050) and less than half of what those with a
bachelor's degree earned ($45,000). The difference has worsened since 1979 when
the average college graduate made 38% more than the average high school
graduate. By 2011 college graduates averaged made 75% more income. "Mobility"
to the "class" of college graduates has declined. Those born with parents who
graduated from college have far better odds of graduating from college than
those born to high school graduates. Gender and race factor. When examining
status mobility within the American labor force, women and minorities hold jobs
with less rank, authority, opportunity for advancement, and pay than men and
whites (. This concept is considered to be the "glass ceiling" effect. One
explanation is seen in the networks of different genders and minorities. The
more managers there are in an employees' immediate work environment, the higher
their chances of interacting and spending time with high status employees. Less
than half of all managers are women, whereas the vast majority of all clerical
and office workers are women. Furthermore, less than fifteen percent of all
managers were minorities, whereas roughly a quarter of all clerical and office
employees were minorities. With regard to women, another explanation for this
"glass ceiling" effect in the American work force is due to the job-family
trade off that women face compared to men. However, there is information that
suggests women adjust their jobs around their family responsibilities more than
men do. Taking a break from the work force tends to decrease human capital when
it comes to finding a job. Women are also more likely than men to take leave
from their jobs to care for others rather than themselves. This evidence makes
employers wary of hiring and promoting women in the work force. Others have
pointed out that men have statistically been willing to accept job conditions
that women were not, such as working outside in extreme weather, working where
you can become physically dirty on a regular basis, working more hours, etc.
According to economist George J. Borjas, intergenerational upward economic
mobility among a wide variety of ethnic groups in the US averages a 5% to 10%
in increase in income from the first to the second generation of immigrants.
Overcoming language barriers and adjusting to the new environment and culture
in American society creates barriers for new immigrants. This intergenerational
mobility includes poor as well as middle income groups, although among the high
income Borjas noted an equalizing tendency in income/status, whereby children
of very successful immigrants tended to have lower, not higher, incomes/status
than their parents. Impact of incarceration on social mobility. Within the
United States the prison population has been steadily increasing since the
early 1970s and has now surpassed two million—the highest per capita rate in
the world. This boom is largely fueled by the “War on Drugs” and has
created an underclass by providing a number of ways to deny one of the most
important tools for social mobility, education. The lack of education for
convicted felons is compounded with difficulties in finding employment. These
two factors contribute towards a high recidivism rate and downward social
mobility. Class cultures and networks. Cultural capital, a term first coined by
French sociologist Pierre Bourdieu is the process of distinguishing between the
economic aspects of class and powerful cultural assets. Bourdieu found that the
culture of the upper social class is oriented more toward formal reasoning and
abstract thought. The lower social class is geared more towards matters of
facts and the necessities of life. He also found that the environment that a
person is developed in has a large effect on the social class that a person
will have. Social system. Societies which use slavery are an example of low
social mobility because, for the enslaved individuals, upward mobility is
practically nonexistent, and for their owners, downward mobility is practically
outlawed. Social mobility is normally discussed as "upward only", but it is a
two-sided phenomenon - where there is upward mobility, there can also be
relative downward mobility. If merit and fortune play a larger role in life
chances than the luck of birth, and some people can manage a relative upward
shift in their social status, then some people can also move downward relative
to others. This is the risk that motivates people in power to increasingly
devise and commission political, legal, educational, and economic mechanisms
that permit them to fortify their advantages. However, by controlling that
inclination, it is possible in a growing economy for there to be greater upward
mobility than downward - as has been the case in Western Europe. Official or
legally recognized class designations do not exist in modern western
democracies and it is considered possible for individuals to move from poverty
to wealth or political prominence within one generation. Despite this formal
opportunity for social mobility, recent research suggests that Britain and
particularly the United States have less social mobility than the Nordic
countries and Canada. These authors state that "the idea of the US as ‘the
land of opportunity’ persists; and clearly seems misplaced." However social
mobility is likely to be much higher in all wealthy societies that offer free
secondary and tertiary education than in poorer countries that do not. Not only
does social mobility vary across types of countries, it can also change over
time. Comparing the United States to the United Kingdom, there was social
mobility of different degrees existing between the two countries during
different historical periods. In the United States in the mid-19th century
inequality was low and social mobility was high. In the late 19th century, the
U.S. had much higher social mobility than in the UK, due to the common school
movement and open public school system, a larger farming sector, as well as
higher geographic mobility in the United States. However, during the latter
half of the 20th and early 21st centuries, the difference between the social
mobilities of the two countries has narrowed, as social inequality has grown in
both countries, but particularly in the United States. In other words, the
individual's family background is more predictive of social position today than
it was in 1850. In market societies like the modern United States, class and
economic wealth are strongly correlated. However, in some societies, such as
feudal societies transitioning to market societies, there is a reduced
probability that class status and wealth overlap. Usually, though, membership
in a high social class provides more opportunities for wealth and political
power, and therefore economic fortune is often a lagging indicator of social
class. In newly formed societies with little or no established tradition (such
as the American West in the 19th century) the reverse is true: Made wealth
precipitates the elite of future generations. Symbols and social mobility.
Social science and understanding segmentation. Theory suggests that there is a
connection between Social Psychologists' understanding of collective identity
and the way sociologists conceive it. Individuals are always seeking ways to
define themselves with regard to the world around them and they can do this
with the meaning given to community and the concept that people are different
from others because of arbitrary differences. could be sexual, racial, or
linguistic, or they could look at other definitions of boundaries. Geographical
boundaries are an example that is strongly reinforced but not as apparent
without extra symbols. Sports teams are an excellent example of symbols that
define geographic boundaries. When people place themselves, they must find a
balance between their community or subgroup and larger communities and out-
groups (which are groups that can be perceived as having a distinct
difference). Scientists “have been studying the segmentation between ‘us’
and ‘them.’” The social definition of groups creates entry and exit
barriers that can help us understand the reasons why social mobility across
group boundaries can be difficult. With symbols ranging from tattoos to elite
prep schools, the concept of a boundary is readily apparent and seems to be
instinctive. The interplay of ‘achievement’ with status and with actual
economic success depends largely on the way that the in-group perceives these
values. The nonparallel views of different groups at different points on the
economic scale mean that advancement in some groups could be counter to the
goals and directions of another group. High-income urban culture can define
itself with multiple symbolic boundaries stemming from prejudice against other
groups that they perceive to be of a different economic status. These actions
make it difficult for others to interact with people who may be geographically
very close. When groups consider themselves mutually exclusive, it is unlikely
that they will worry about the well being of the others and are unwilling to
share resources (In the form of social capital in this case) An urban planning
perspective on group boundaries. Kevin A. Lynch touches on the concept of
geographic boundaries and their social impact, as well as ways they can be
manipulated in his book Image of the City. This work addresses the visible and
invisible boundaries that are created in urban environments from an urban
planner's perspective. The spatial information people use to create boundaries
can be as important to perception as other more culturally entrenched symbols.
To use some of Lynch’s own terms, the Paths that people use dictate their
flow in every day behavior, and what is accessible to them easily. Districts
are large sections of the city that have some specific character; these create
a means of building individual identity that is shared by those who live and
work inside them, and (is) felt by those that must cross Edges for various
reasons. When seeking jobs or healthcare for instance. How sociology views
neighborhood boundaries. According to Sampson, Morenoff, and Gannon-Rowley’s
article Assessing “Neighborhood Effects”: Social Processes and New
Directions in Research on the relationship between adolescent behavior and
indicators of residential differentiation, “Robert Park and Ernest Burgess
laid the foundation for urban sociology by defining local communities as
'natural areas' that developed as a result of competition between businesses
for land use and between population groups for affordable housing.” This
indicates that resources that are available to the community will largely be
affected by the wealth of the population. There is change that happens in
communities however, and they evolve over time. This study suggests that
longitudinal studies could observe trends in the community over time. As
neighborhood dynamics change, there could be a movement of social groups into
proximity with other similar groups creating a hybrid of the two cultures.
Another possibility is that the groups in an area move around, but do not
intermingle, and when they feel pressure that threatens their hold on an area,
they could fight back at the local level, or choose to relocate to a place
where economic conditions restrict entry. Influences that cross multiple
boundaries. The benefits of having symbols that define social boundaries work
to keep people from falling down as much as they can prevent others from moving
up. The value of the work ethic, that is shared in many cultures, maintains an
individual’s drive and prompts them to seek out and hold employment. Symbols
of social status such as leadership roles are important for developing role
models, and leadership models are often seen by children as bridging the more
detrimental class boundaries. As shown here: “There are also cross-cultural
differences in how symbolic boundaries are linked to social boundaries. The
same social boundary can be coupled with different symbolic boundaries as class
distinctions in Europe are tied to the symbolic boundary between high culture
and popular culture.” Current research. In recent decades, new status
hiearchies have emerged, leading to new opportunities for competition. India
has seen a recent boom in employment, communication, distribution of goods,
centralized administration, and urban living. This urbanization provides an
escape from the ties of membership in rural based communities. Factors that
would predetermine an individual's status are not as effective in urban areas.
According to Harold Gould, the criteria for determining occupations in India
are a person's skill and quality of performance rather than place of birth. The
status of any given role is based on its economic rewards and mobility. Studies
have also shown that technological advances have both displaced certain groups
as well as offered the chance for upward mobility. Some groups find themselves
displaced by developing technology because their economic and social status
have declined (ex. water carriers in parts of Northern India have been
displaced by the introduction of handpumps). In other cases, individuals are
finding new occupations with the opportunity for upward mobility. Most
advances, however, appear to coincide with the opportunity for enhancement of
social status. In international comparisons, using the relationship between
parents’ and children’s incomes as an indicator of relative mobility, data
show that a number of countries including Denmark, Norway, Finland, Canada,
Sweden, Germany, and France have more relative mobility than does the United
States. UK Prime Minister Gordon Brown has famously said that trends in social
mobility "are not as we would have liked".. The relation between social and
economic mobility and equal opportunityand how they are related to income
inequality and wealth inequality are th subject of much current research. .
