Socialism of the 21st century Socialism of the 21st century is a political term
and a slogan coined by Heinz Dieterich in 1996. It was used by Hugo Chávez
during a speech at the World Social Forum of 2005 and it has been publicised
actively by Dieterich worldwide since 2000, especially in Latin America.
Bolivarian process. Dieterich is considered the (informal) advisor of the
Bolivarian development process which is executed by Venezuelan president Hugo
Chávez. According to Dieterich, neither “industrial capitalism” nor
“real socialism” have managed “to solve the urgent problems of humanity,
like poverty, hunger, exploitation, economic oppression, sexism, racism, the
destruction of natural resources, and the absence of a really participative
democracy.” Socialism of the 21st Century – Economy, Society, and Democracy
in the era of global Capitalism, Introduction Organizations. The Bolivarian
Alternative for the Americas (ALBA) was founded as the premise for grouping
such countries together. Basic institutions. These institutions of the New
Historical Project rest upon the fundamental pillars of participative
democracy, regional cooperation (by forming "regional blocks of popular power")
and worker rights. According to Dieterich, the existing society should be
replaced by a “qualitatively different system". “The program of the
Socialism of the 21st Century is necessarily a revolutionary one.” This
revolution, however, should be a gradual process, which does not employ
violence and that is sensitive to the fact that the institutions we have now
are the result of thousands of years of trial and error. Because of this, they
cannot be changed from dusk till dawn, as the experiences of real socialism
have shown us. According to Dieterich, human beings are not rats in a
laboratory. Every large scale social revolution that wants to be successful,
has to be the result of well informed persuasion about the benefits of a
project, rather than imposition through state force and repression. This
revolution will result from participative democracy to secure power, education,
scientific knowledge about society and international cooperation.
