Socialist competition Socialist competition or socialist emulation
(социалистическое соревнование,
"sotsialisticheskoye sorevnovanie", or "соцсоревнование",
"sotssorevnovanie") was a form of competition between state enterprises and
between individuals practiced in the Soviet Union and in other Eastern bloc
states. Competition vs. emulation. The first variant is a literal translation
of the Russian term, commonly used by Western authors. The second form is an
official Soviet translation of the term, intended to put distance from the
"capitalist competition", which in its turn was translated as
"капиталистическая конкуренция",
"kapitalisticheskaya konkurenciya". There was a significant amount of
propaganda along the lines that "capitalist competition" favors only the
winning capitalist, while "socialist emulation" benefits all. Organization.
Socialist emulation was voluntary everywhere where people worked or served: in
industry, in agriculture, in offices, institutions, schools, hospitals, army,
etc. With the natural exception of armed force, committees of Soviet trade
unions were in charge of managing the socialist emulation. An important
component of socialist emulation was "socialist self-obligations"
(социалистические обязательства). While the
production plan was the major benchmark, employees and work collectives were
supposed to put forth "socialist self-obligations" and even "enhanced socialist
self-obligations" (повышенные соцобязательства)
beyond the plan. Deadlines for tallying up the results of a socialist emulation
were usually set at major Socialist and Communist holidays or notable dates,
like the birthday of Vladimir Lenin or the anniversary of the October
Revolution. Winners were awarded both materially and morally. Material awards
were money, goods or perks specific to Socialist system, such as tickets to
resorts, authorizations for a trip abroad, right to obtain a dwelling or a car
outside the main , etc. Moral awards were honorary diploma, honorary badges,
putting winners' portraits on the "Board of Honor" (Доска Почета);
work collectives were awarded with the "Transferrable Red Banner of the
Socialist Emulation Winner" (Переходящее знамя
победителя в социалистическом
соревновании). History. Vladimir Lenin was the originator and the
promoter of the idea of socialist emulation as a means for organising "the
majority of working people into a field of labour in which they can display
their abilities, develop the capacities, and reveal those talents". His
milestone article was "How to organize the emulation?" ("Как
организовать соревнование?"), in which among the
important goal of the emulation was discovery of persons with organizational
and management skills, to replace tsarist-era specialists. Also, he was the
first to set "socialist emulation" against "capitalist competition". Later,
Joseph Stalin wrote in his streamlined style: While criteria of socialist
emulation were easy to set, understand and quantify in production areas, it was
not so in non-production areas: medicine, education, work of clerks, etc.,
where significant formalism took place and among the criteria a significant
weight was attributed to "social activism", not related to the work done.
