Solidarity Solidarity is the integration, and degree and type of integration,
shown by a society or group with people and their neighbours. It refers to the
ties in a society that bind people to one another. The term is generally
employed in sociology and the other social sciences. What forms the basis of
solidarity varies between societies. In simple societies it may be mainly based
around kinship and shared values. In more complex societies there are various
theories as to what contributes to a sense of social solidarity. Durkheim.
According to Émile Durkheim, the types of social solidarity correlate with
types of society. Durkheim introduced the terms "mechanical" and "organic
solidarity" as part of his theory of the development of societies in "The
Division of Labour in Society" (1893). In a society exhibiting mechanical
solidarity, its cohesion and integration comes from the homogeneity of
individuals—people feel connected through similar work, educational and
religious training, and lifestyle. Mechanical solidarity normally operates in
"traditional" and small scale societies. In simpler societies (e.g., tribal),
solidarity is usually based on kinship ties of familial networks. Organic
solidarity comes from the interdependence that arises from specialization of
work and the complementarities between people—a development which occurs in
"modern" and "industrial" societies. Definition: it is social cohesion based
upon the dependence individuals have on each other in more advanced societies.
Although individuals perform different tasks and often have different values
and interest, the order and very solidarity of society depends on their
reliance on each other to perform their specified tasks. Organic here is
referring to the interdependence of the component parts. Thus, social
solidarity is maintained in more complex societies through the interdependence
of its component parts (e.g., farmers produce the food to feed the factory
workers who produce the tractors that allow the farmer to produce the food)
