Social fascism Social fascism was a theory supported by the Communist
International (Comintern) during the early 1930s, which held that social
democracy was a variant of fascism because, in addition to a shared corporatist
economic model, it stood in the way of a complete and final transition to
communism. At the time, the leaders of the Comintern, such as Joseph Stalin and
Rajani Palme Dutt, argued that capitalist society had entered the "Third
Period" in which a working class revolution was imminent, but could be
prevented by social democrats and other "fascist" forces. The term "social
fascist" was used pejoratively to describe social democratic parties, anti-
Comintern and progressive socialist parties, and dissenters within Comintern
affiliates throughout the interwar period. Overview. At the Sixth Congress of
the Comintern in 1928, the end of capitalist stability and the beginning of the
"Third Period" was proclaimed. The end of capitalism, accompanied with a
working class revolution, was expected, and social democracy was identified as
the main enemy of the Communists. This Comintern's theory had roots in Grigory
Zinoviev's argument that international social democracy is a wing of fascism.
This view was accepted by Joseph Stalin who described fascism and social
democracy as "twin brothers", arguing that fascism depends on the active
support of the social democracy and that the social democracy depends on the
active support of fascism. After it was declared at the Sixth Congress, the
theory of social fascism became accepted by the world Communist movement. At
the same time, Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD), under leadership of
German chancellor Hermann Müller, agreed with anti-communist parties that "red
equals brown". This led to mutual hostility between social democrats and
communists, which were additionally intensified in 1929 when Berlin's police,
under control of the SPD government, shot down communist workers demonstrating
on May Day (Berlin's Bloody May). This, and the repressive legislation against
the communists that followed, served as further evidence to communists that
social democrats were indeed "social fascists". In 1931 in Prussia, the largest
state of Germany, Communist Party of Germany (KPD), which referred to the Nazis
as "working people's comrades", united with them in unsuccessful attempt to
bring down the state government of SPD by means of a plebiscite. German
Communists continued to deny any essential difference between Nazism and Social
Democracy even after elections in 1933. The KPD, under the leadership of Ernst
Thälmann, coined the slogan "After Hitler, our turn!" – strongly believing
that united front against Nazis wasn't needed, and that the workers would
change their opinion and recognize that Nazism, unlike Communism, didn't offer
a true way out of Germany's difficulties. See also: Wilhelm Hoegner and Walter
Kolbenhoff. After Adolf Hitler's Nazis came to power in Germany, the KPD was
outlawed and thousands of its members, including Thälmann, were arrested.
Following these events, the Comintern did a complete turn on the question of
alliance with social democrats, and the theory of "social fascism" was
abandoned. At the Seventh Congress of the Comintern in 1935, Georgi Dimitrov
outlined the new policy of the "popular front" in his address, "For the Unity
of the Working Class Against Fascism." The "popular front" period ended in 1939
with the conclusion of the Nazi-Soviet Pact. Trotsky's criticism. "The front
must now be directed against fascism. And this common front of direct struggle
against fascism, embracing the entire proletariat, must be utilized in the
struggle against the Social Democracy, directed as a flank attack, but no less
effective for all that... "No common platform with the Social Democracy, or
with the leaders of the German trade unions, no common publications, banners,
placards! March separately, but strike together! Agree only how to strike, whom
to strike, and when to strike! Such an agreement can be concluded even with the
devil himself... "No retraction of our criticism of the Social Democracy. No
forgetting of all that has been. The whole historical reckoning, including the
reckoning for Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg, will be presented at the
proper time, just as the Russian Bolsheviks finally presented a general
reckoning to the Mensheviks and Social Revolutionaries for the baiting,
calumny, imprisonment and murder of workers, soldiers, and peasants." Six
months after the Nazi party won the German elections, Ernst Thälmann was
imprisoned by the fascists.
