Socialist feminism Socialist feminism is a branch of feminism that focuses upon
both the public and private spheres of a woman's life and argues that
liberation can only be achieved by working to end both the economic and
cultural sources of women's oppression. Socialist feminism is a two-pronged
theory that broadens Marxist feminism's argument for the role of capitalism in
the oppression of women and radical feminism's theory of the role of gender and
the patriarchy. Socialist feminists reject radical feminism’s main claim that
patriarchy the only or primary source of oppression of women. Rather, socialist
feminists assert that women are unable to be free due to their financial
dependence on males in society. Women are subjects to the male rulers in
capitalism due to an uneven balance in wealth. They see economic dependence as
the driving force of women’s subjugation to men. Further, socialist feminists
see women’s liberation as a necessary part of larger quest for social,
economic and political justice. Socialist feminism draws upon many concepts
found in Marxism; such as a historical materialist point of view, which means
that they relate their ideas to the material and historical conditions of
people’s lives.Socialist feminists thus consider how the sexism and gendered
division of labor of each historical era is determined by the economic system
of the time. Those conditions are largely expressed through capitalist and
patriarchal relations.Socialist feminists,thus reject the Marxist notion that
class and class struggle are the only defining aspects of history and economic
development. Marx asserted that when class oppression was overcome, gender
oppression would vanish as well. According to socialist feminists, this view of
gender oppression as a sub-class of class oppression is naive and much of the
work of socialist feminists has gone towards specifying how gender and class
work together to create distinct forms of oppression and privilege for women
and men of each class. For example, they observe that women’s class status is
generally derivative of her husband’s class or occupational status.e.g., a
secretary that marries her boss assumes his class status. In 1972 the Chicago
Women's Liberation Union published "Socialist Feminism: A Strategy for the
Women's Movement," which is believed to be the first to use the term "socialist
feminism," in publication. Other socialist feminists, notably two long-lived
American organizations Radical Women and the Freedom Socialist Party, point to
the classic Marxist writings of Frederick Engels ("The Origin of the Family,
Private Property and the State") and August Bebel ("Woman and Socialism") as a
powerful explanation of the link between gender oppression and class
exploitation. On the other hand, the Socialist Party USA is an example of a
socialist feminist party which is not explicitly Marxist (although some members
identify as Marxists). The party's statement of principles says, "Socialist
feminism confronts the common root of sexism, racism and classism: the
determination of a life of oppression or privilege based on accidents of birth
or circumstances. Socialist feminism is an inclusive way of creating social
change. We value synthesis and cooperation rather than conflict and
competition." Socialist Feminist Praxis. Holds the belief that to achieve
women’s liberation, women's liberation must be sought in conjunction with the
social and economic justice of all people. Socialist feminists see the fight to
end male supremacy as key to social justice, but not the only issue, rather one
of many forms of oppression that are mutually reinforcing. Socialist Feminism,
Motherhood,and the Private Sphere. Socialist feminists highlight how motherhood
and the gendered division of labor many assert grows “naturally” from
women’s role as mothers is the source of women’s exclusion from the public
sphere and creates women’s economic dependence on men.They assert that there
is nothing natural about the gendered division of labor and show that the
expectation that women perform all or most reproductive labor, i.e., labor
associated with birthing and raising children but also the cleaning, cooking,
and other tasks necessary to support human life, deny women the capacity to
participate fully in economic activity outside the home. In order to free
themselves from the conditions of work as a mother and housekeeper, socialist
feminists such as Charlotte Perkins Gilman saw the professionalization of
housework as key. This would be done by hiring professional nannies and
housekeepers to take the load of domestic work away from the woman in the house
.Perkins Gilman also recommended the redesign of homes in ways that would
maximize their potential for creativity and leisure for women as well as men,
i.e., emphasizing the need for rooms like studios and studies and eliminating
kitchens and dining rooms. These changes would necessitate the communalization
of meal preparation and consumption outside the home and free women from their
burden of providing meals on a house-by-house scale.
