Socialist Resistance Socialist Resistance (SR) is a Trotskyist and ecosocialist
organisation in Britain which publishes a Marxist periodical of the same name.
In July 2009 the International Socialist Group (ISG) merged into it, making SR
the British Section of the Fourth International. Origins. It was launched on 8
September 2002 by two organisations, the Socialist Solidarity Network (SSN) and
International Socialist Group (ISG), and 33 individuals. The founders of
Socialist Resistance included Frances Curran and Catriona Grant, leading
members of the Scottish Socialist Party, Murray Smith, former SSP international
officer and Andrew Burgin from of the Stop the War Coalition, leading members
of the Socialist Alliance included James White, secretary of Barnsley Alliance,
Mathew Caygill secretary of Leeds Socialist Alliance plus Lesley Mahmood
(Liverpool) and Margaret Manning (Manchester) from the Socialist Alliance
Executive. Organisation. Founded as a network it developed the norms of an
organisation, included elected bodies, local groups and formal membership. By
2007 135 activists had subscribed to its internal listserver of whom around at
least 65 could be assumed to have been members of the ISG [http://
uk.groups.yahoo.com/group/Socialist_Outlook/; and at least 20 of whom were
supporters of the SSN [http://groups.yahoo.com/group/Socialist-solidarity/].
Its members also include former supporters in Britain of the Democratic
Socialist Perspective. In July 2009 Socialist Resistance adopted a constitution
and a more extensive political basis. The organisation is controlled by an
annual conference to which one delegate is elected for every three members. It
elects a National Committee and an Appeals Committee (a control commission).
The National Committee appoints sub-committees, including an executive and an
editorial board. Activities. It organises monthly public meetings in London,
Oxford and Birmingham, as well as national open forums each year. For example,
it organised a June 2006 dayschool on the Bolivarian revolution addressed by
Michael Lowy and Celia Hart, a September 2006 annual general meeting, December
2006 and May 2007 forums on "ecosocialism" and a March 2007 forum on the Middle
East. These events often provide themes for books published by Resistance: it
produced the first book of Celia Hart's writings in English, Ron Ridenour's
2006 book on Cuba, the first book on ecosocialism and a large collection on the
Middle East, edited by Roland Rance and Terry Conway. In September 2009,
Socialist Resistance, together with Green Left, organised a seminar on Climate
and Capitalism, with Ian Angus as the main speaker. Resistance also publishes
irregular broadsheets and pamphlets. Three leading activists in Resistance are
on the editorial board of "International Viewpoint". Socialist Resistance also
co-operates with Green Left and the Red-Green Study Group in the Ecosocialist
International Network. Periodical. The rationale for the new publication was "
(...) to express and build support for a distinct political position which,
despite differences among us on secondary issues, we share. We want to deepen
the fight for a broad socialist party in England on the model of, for example,
the SSP in Scotland and the Party of Communist Refoundation in Italy." Between
September 2002 and November 2007 it produced 49 issues of a 28-page tabloid
which was produced monthly, with summer and winter issues spanning two months
each. In November 2007, the resources used for the newspaper were dedicated to
the Respect Renewal movement, allowing it to plan the launch of a newspaper in
December 2007. According to a statement by the group's Steering Committee, the
change was unanimously agreed at a meeting of the group's members. In January
2008, the group's aggregate agreed to relaunch "Socialist Resistance" as a
colour quarterly magazine in April 2008.
