Social contract In political philosophy the social contract or political
contract is a theory or model, originating during the Age of Enlightenment,
that typically addresses the questions of the origin of society and the
legitimacy of the authority of the state over the individual. Social contract
arguments typically posit that individuals have consented, either explicitly or
tacitly, to surrender some of their freedoms and submit to the authority of the
ruler or magistrate (or to the decision of a majority), in exchange for
protection of their remaining rights. The question of the relation between
natural and legal rights, therefore, is often an aspect of social contract
theory. Although the antecedents of social contract theory are found in
antiquity, in Greek and Stoic philosophy and Roman and Canon Law, as well as in
the Biblical idea of the covenant, the heyday of the social contract was the
mid-seventeenth to early nineteenth centuries, when it emerged as the leading
doctrine of political legitimacy. The starting point for most social contract
theories is a heuristic examination of the human condition absent from any
political order that Thomas Hobbes termed the “state of nature”. In this
condition, individuals' actions are bound only by their personal power and
conscience. From this shared starting point social contract theorists seek to
demonstrate, in different ways, why a rational individual would voluntarily
consent to give up his or her natural freedom to obtain the benefits of
political order. Hugo Grotius, Thomas Hobbes (1651), Samuel Pufendorf (1673),
John Locke (1689), and Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1762) are among the most
prominent of seventeenth- and eighteenth-century theorists of social contract
and natural rights. Each solved the problem of political authority in a
different way. Grotius posited that individual human beings had natural rights;
Hobbes asserted that men consent to abdicate their rights in favor of the
absolute authority of government (whether monarchial or parliamentary);
Pufendorf disputed Hobbes's equation of a state of nature with war. Locke
believed that natural rights were inalienable, and that the rule of God
therefore superseded government authority; and Rousseau believed that democracy
(self-rule) was the best way of ensuring the general welfare while maintaining
individual freedom under the rule of law. The Lockean concept of the social
contract was invoked in the United States Declaration of Independence. Social
contract theories were eclipsed in the nineteenth century in favor of
utilitarianism, Hegelianism, and Marxism, and were revived in the twentieth,
notably in the form of a thought experiment by John Rawls. Overview. Thomas
Hobbes famously said that in a "state of nature" human life would be "solitary,
poor, nasty, brutish, and short". In the absence of political order and law,
everyone would have unlimited natural freedoms, including the "right to all
things" and thus the freedom to plunder, rape, and murder; there would be an
endless "war of all against all" ("bellum omnium contra omnes"). To avoid this,
free men contract with each other to establish political community i.e. civil
society through a social contract in which they all gain security in return for
subjecting themselves to an absolute Sovereign, preferably (for Hobbes) a
monarch. Though the Sovereign's edicts may well be arbitrary and tyrannical,
Hobbes saw absolute government as the only alternative to the terrifying
anarchy of a state of nature. Alternatively, John Locke and Jean-Jacques
Rousseau, have argued that we gain civil rights in return for accepting the
obligation to respect and defend the rights of others, giving up some freedoms
to do so. The central assertion of social contract approaches is that law and
political order are not natural, but are instead human creations. The social
contract and the political order it creates are simply the means towards an end
— the benefit of the individuals involved — and legitimate only to the
extent that they fulfill their part of the agreement. According to Hobbes (in
whose view government is not a party to the original contract) citizens are not
obligated to submit to the government when it is too weak to act effectively to
suppress factionalism and civil unrest. According to other social contract
theorists, citizens can withdraw their obligation to obey or change the
leadership, through elections or other means including, when necessary,
violence, when the government fails to secure their natural rights (Locke) or
satisfy the best interest of society (called the "general will" in Rousseau,
who is more concerned with forming new governments than in overthrowing old
ones). History. Classical thought. Many point to Socrates' argument,
specifically as given in Plato's Crito, for accepting his order to drink poison
as representing a sophisticated argument for observing social contracts. Social
contract formulations are preserved in many of the world's oldest records. In
his rock edicts. the Buddhist king Asoka was said to have argued for a broad
and far reaching social contract. The Buddhist vinaya also reflects social
contracts expected of the monks, one such instance is when the people of a
certain town complained about monks felling saka trees, the Buddha tells his
monks that they must stop and give way to social norms. Epicurus seems to have
had a strong sense of social contract, with justice and law being rooted in
mutual agreement and advantage, as evidenced by these lines, among others, from
his "Principal Doctrines" ("see also Epicurean ethics"); Renaissance
developments. Quentin Skinner has argued that several critical modern
innovations in contract theory are found in the writings from French Calvinists
and Huguenots, whose work in turn was invoked by writers in the Low Countries
who objected to their subjection to Spain and, later still, by Catholics in
England. Among these, Francisco Suárez (1548–1617), from the School of
Salamanca, might be considered as an early theorist of the social contract,
theorizing natural law in an attempt to limit the divine right of absolute
monarchy. All of these groups were led to articulate notions of popular
sovereignty by means of a social covenant or contract: all of these arguments
began with proto-“state of nature” arguments, to the effect that the basis
of politics is that everyone is by nature free of subjection to any government.
However, these arguments relied on a corporatist theory found in Roman Law,
according to which "a populus" can exist as a distinct legal entity. Therefore
these arguments held that a group of people can join a government because it
has the capacity to exercise a single will and make decisions with a single
voice in the absence of sovereign authority — a notion rejected by Hobbes and
later contract theorists. Philosophers. Hugo Grotius (1625). In the early 17th
century, Grotius (1583–1645) introduced the modern idea of "natural rights"
of individuals. Grotius postulates that each individual has natural rights that
enable self-preservation and employs this idea as a basis for moral consensus
in the face of religious diversity and the rise of natural science. He seeks to
find a parsimonious basis for a moral beginning for society, a kind of natural
law that everyone could accept. He goes so far as to say in his "On the Law of
War and Peace" that even if we were to concede what we cannot concede without
the utmost wickedness, namely that there is no God, these laws would still
hold. The idea was considered incendiary since it suggested that power can
ultimately go back to the individuals if the political society that they have
set up forfeits the purpose for which it was originally established, which is
to preserve themselves. In other words, individual persons are sovereign.
Grotius says that the people are "sui juris" (under their own jurisdiction).
People have rights as human beings but there is a delineation of those rights
because of what is possible for everyone to accept morally; everyone has to
accept that each person as an individual is entitled to try to preserve
himself. Each person should, therefore, avoid doing harm to or interfering with
another. Any breach of these rights should be punished. Thomas Hobbes'
"Leviathan" (1651). The first modern philosopher to articulate a detailed
contract theory was Thomas Hobbes (1588–1679). According to Hobbes, the lives
of individuals in the state of nature were "solitary, poor, nasty, brutish and
short", a state in which self-interest and the absence of rights and contracts
prevented the 'social', or society. Life was 'anarchic' (without leadership/
the concept of sovereignty). Individuals in the state of nature were apolitical
and asocial. This state of nature is followed by the social contract. The
social contract was an 'occurrence' during which individuals came together and
ceded some of their individual rights so that others would cede theirs (e.g.
person A gives up his/her right to kill person B if person B does the same).
This resulted in the establishment of the state, a sovereign entity like the
individuals now under its rule used to be, which would create laws to regulate
social interactions. Human life was thus no longer "a war of all against all".
But the state system, which grew out of the social contract, was anarchic
(without leadership). Just as the individuals in the state of nature had been
sovereigns and thus guided by self-interest and the absence of rights, so
states now acted in their self-interest in competition with each other. Just
like the state of nature, states were thus bound to be in conflict because
there was no sovereign over and above the state (i.e. more powerful) capable of
imposing social-contract laws. Indeed, Hobbes' work helped to serve as a basis
for the realism theories of international relations, advanced by E.H. Carr and
Hans Morgenthau. John Locke's "Second Treatise of Government" (1689). John
Locke's conception of the social contract differed from Hobbes' in several
fundamental ways, retaining only the central notion that persons in a state of
nature would willingly come together to form a state. Locke believed that
individuals in a state of nature would be bound morally, by The Law of Nature,
not to harm each other in their lives or possession, but without government to
defend them against those seeking to injure or enslave them, people would have
no security in their rights and would live in fear. Locke argued that
individuals would agree to form a state that would provide a "neutral judge",
acting to protect the lives, liberty, and property of those who lived within
it. While Hobbes argued for near-absolute authority, Locke argued for inviolate
freedom under law in his "Second Treatise of Government". Locke argued that
government's legitimacy comes from the citizens' delegation to the government
of their right of self-defense (of "self-preservation"). The government thus
acts as an impartial, objective agent of that self-defense, rather than each
man acting as his own judge, jury, and executioner—the condition in the state
of nature. In this view, government derives its "just powers from the consent
delegation of the governed,". Jean-Jacques Rousseau's "Du contrat social"
(1762). Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1712–1778), in his influential 1762 treatise
"The Social Contract", outlined a different version of social contract theory,
as the foundations of political rights based on unlimited popular sovereignty.
Although Rousseau wrote that the British were perhaps at the time the freest
people on earth, he did not approve of their representative government.
Rousseau believed that liberty was possible only where there was direct rule by
the people as a whole in lawmaking, where popular sovereignty was indivisible
and inalienable. But he also maintained that the people often did not know
their "real will," and that a proper society would not occur until a great
leader ("the Legislator") arose to change the values and customs of the people,
likely through the strategic use of religion. Rousseau's political theory
differs in important ways from that of Locke and Hobbes. Rousseau's
collectivism is most evident in his development of the "luminous conception"
(which he credited to Diderot) of the general will. Rousseau argues a citizen
cannot pursue his true interest by being an egoist but must instead subordinate
himself to the law created by the citizenry acting as a collective. Rousseau's
striking phrase that man must "be forced to be free" should be understood this
way: since the indivisible and inalienable popular sovereignty decides what is
good for the whole, then if an individual lapses back into his ordinary egoism
and disobeys the leadership, he will be forced to listen to what they decided
as a member of the collectivity (i.e. as citizens). Thus, the law, inasmuch as
it is created by the people acting as a body, is not a limitation of individual
freedom, but its expression. Thus, enforcement of law, including criminal law,
is not a restriction on individual liberty, as the individual, as a citizen,
explicitly agreed to be constrained if, as a private individual, he did not
respect his own will as formulated in the general will. Because laws represent
the restraints of civil freedom, they represent the leap made from humans in
the state of nature into civil society. In this sense, the law is a civilizing
force, and therefore Rousseau believed that the laws that govern a people
helped to mold their character. Pierre-Joseph Proudhon's individualist social
contract (1851). While Rousseau's social contract is based on popular
sovereignty and not on individual sovereignty, there are other theories
espoused by individualists, libertarians and anarchists, which do not involve
agreeing to anything more than negative rights and creates only a limited
state, if any. John Rawls' "Theory of Justice" (1971). John Rawls (1921–2002)
proposed a contractarian approach that has a decidedly Kantian flavour, in "A
Theory of Justice" (1971), whereby rational people in a hypothetical "original
position", setting aside their individual preferences and capacities under a
"veil of ignorance", would agree to certain general principles of justice and
legal organization. This idea is also used as a game-theoretical formalization
of the notion of fairness. David Gauthier's "Morals By Agreement" (1986). David
Gauthier "neo-Hobbesian" theory argues that cooperation between two independent
and self-interested parties is indeed possible; especially when it comes to
understanding morality and politics. Gauthier notably points out the advantages
of cooperation between two parties when it comes to the challenge of the
prisoner's dilemma. He proposes that if both parties were to stick by the
original agreed-upon arrangement and morals outlined by the contract that they
both would experience an optimal result. In his model for the social contract,
trust, rationality and self-interest are all factors that keep each party
honest and dissuade them from breaking the rules. Philip Pettit's
"Republicanism" (1997). Philip Pettit (b. 1945) has argued, in "Republicanism:
A Theory of Freedom and Government" (1997), that the theory of social contract,
classically based on the consent of the governed, should be modified. Instead
of arguing for explicit consent, which can always be manufactured, Pettit
argues that the absence of an effective rebellion against the contract is the
only legitimacy of it. Critical theories. Consent of the governed. An early
critic of social contract theory was Rousseau's friend, the philosopher David
Hume, who in 1742 published an essay "Of Civil Liberty", in whose second part,
entitled, "Of the Original Contract ", he stressed that the concept of a
"social contract" was a convenient fiction: Hume argued that consent of the
governed was the ideal foundation on which a government could rest, but that it
had not actually occurred this way in general. Natural law and
constitutionalism. Legal scholar Randy Barnett has argued that, while presence
in the territory of a society may be necessary for consent, it is not consent
to "any" rules the society might make regardless of their content. A second
condition of consent is that the rules be consistent with underlying principles
of justice and the protection of natural and social rights, and have procedures
for effective protection of those rights (or liberties). This has also been
discussed by O.A. Brownson, who argued that, in a sense, three "constitutions"
are involved: first the "constitution of nature" that includes all of what the
Founders called "natural law"; second the "constitution of society", an
unwritten and commonly understood set of rules for the society formed by a
social contract before it establishes a government; by which it does establish
the third, a "constitution of government". To consent, a necessary condition is
that the rules be "constitutional" in that sense. Tacit consent. The theory of
an implicit social contract holds that by remaining in the territory controlled
by some society, which usually has a government, people give consent to join
that society and be governed by its government, if any. This consent is what
gives legitimacy to such government. However, other writers have argued that
consent to join the society is not necessarily consent to its government. For
that, the government must be according to a constitution of government that is
consistent with the superior unwritten constitutions of nature and society.
Voluntarism. According to the will theory of contract, a contract is not
presumed valid unless all parties agree to it voluntarily, either tacitly or
explicitly, without coercion. Lysander Spooner, a 19th century lawyer and
staunch supporter of a right of contract between individuals, in his essay "No
Treason", argues that a supposed social contract cannot be used to justify
governmental actions such as taxation, because government will initiate force
against anyone who does not wish to enter into such a contract. As a result, he
maintains that such an agreement is not voluntary and therefore cannot be
considered a legitimate contract at all. Modern Anglo-American law, like
European civil law, is based on a will theory of contract, according to which
all terms of a contract are binding on the parties because they chose those
terms for themselves. This was less true when Hobbes wrote Leviathan; then,
more importance was attached to consideration, meaning a mutual exchange of
benefits necessary to the formation of a valid contract, and most contracts had
implicit terms that arose from the nature of the contractual relationship
rather than from the choices made by the parties. Accordingly, it has been
argued that social contract theory is more consistent with the contract law of
the time of Hobbes and Locke than with the contract law of our time, and that
features in the social contract which seem anomalous to us, such as the belief
that we are bound by a contract formulated by our distant ancestors, would not
have seemed as strange to Hobbes' contemporaries as they do to us.
