Socialist Review (US) Socialist Review (ISSN 0161-1801, originally titled
Socialist Revolution) was a left-wing political and cultural magazine published
in the United States since 1970. At the end of 2002 it was renamed Radical
Society: Review of Culture and Politics (ISSN 1476-0851). "Socialist
Revolution", under its founding editor James Weinstein, began with a
revolutionary perspective which was, however, very critical of the existing
Marxist left (including the New Communist Movement as well as established
organizations) which it saw as undemocratic both in its way of operating and in
its political aspirations. In the 1970s and early 1980s SR was strongly
associated with the New American Movement, and its politics in this period
developed in a similar direction towards a more Social Democratic perspective.
In the course of this development the journal was renamed "Socialist Review" in
1978, meanwhile absorbing the short-lived "Marxist Perspectives". Because the
journal had been founded in San Francisco with an editorial collective that
included many University of California at Berkeley graduate students, it showed
an openness to theory that was not universally shared by journals on the left
in the 1970s. As some of the original collective graduated and got teaching
jobs in the Boston area, a second editorial collective was founded in nearby
Somerville (and later a short-lived New York collective also came into
existence for similar reasons). As the members of the Boston collective began
to get tenure, the nature of the two main editorial collectives began to
diverge, with the Boston Collective attracting junior faculty, while the Bay
Area collective continued well into the 1980s to be composed primarily of grad
students and community activists. The Boston Collective was notable for the
quality of its economic analysis, while the West Coast Collective was active in
producing articles out of the various identity movements of the 1980s, always
with an eye toward theory. During this period, a careful reader could tell
exactly which collective was responsible for which articles in the journal, but
to most observers it meant that "Socialist Review" reflected the diversity of
positions available on the left. "Socialist Review" came to be strongly
associated with postmodern critical theory and evolved into an academic journal
with a strong cultural element. Among the notable articles published in SR was
Donna Haraway's "A Cyborg Manifesto," the founding document of Cyborg theory.
In 1991, Verso published "Unfinished Business: 20 Years of Socialist Review",
containing 20 of the best-known articles from its pages. Contributors. Among
the editorial collective members of "Socialist Review" were such prominent
writers and activists as Robert L. Allen, Tomas Almaguer, Barbara Baran,
Michael Barrett, Fred Block, Carl Boggs, Amy Bridges, Dick Bunce, Mina Davis
Caufield, Debra Chasnoff, Bell Gale Chevigny, Nancy Chodorow, Harry Chotiner,
Bruce Dancis, Gary Delgado, Carol Duncan, Kate Ellis, Barbara L. Epstein, Steve
Epstein, Jeffrey Escoffier, Candace Falk, Lou Ferleger, Amy Flecher, Laura
Frader, Richard Flacks, Melia Franklin, Michael Gelobter, Herbert Gintis,
Jackie Goldsby, Roger Gottlieb, Karen Hansen, Carol Hatch, Dorothy Healey,
Amber Hollibaugh, Candace Howes, Ann Kaplan, Denise Kastan, Michael Kazin, Alex
Keyssar, Karl Klare, Richard Kohl, Michael Lerner, Richard Lichtman, Ann
Markusen, Steve McMahon, Robby Meeropol, Louis Menashe, Ruth Milkman, David
Noble, Michael Omni, Ilene Philipson, Mike Pincus, Howard Pinderhughes, David
Plotke, Leonard Quart, Elizabeth Rapaport, Rayna Rapp, Michael Reich, Bill
Resnick, Michael Rosenthal, Pam Rosenthal, Martha Rosler, George Ross, Elliott
Sclar, Gay Seidman, Nancy Shaw, Jim Shoch, Ron Silliman, Carmen Sirianni, Vicki
Smith, Steve Spitzer, Dana Takagi, Howard Winant, and Eli Zaretsky. In 2002 the
journal's name was changed again, to "Radical Society: A Review of Culture and
Politics". From 2002 to 2003 it was published by the academic publisher
Routledge. , an independent publisher, Radical Society Ltd., took over
publishing the journal and relaunched the Radical Society website, making past
issues available online. As of the end of 2006, the Editor-in-Chief of Radical
Society was Timothy Don. It has since ceased publication.
