Social liberalism Social liberalism is the belief that liberalism should
include a social foundation. It differs from classical liberalism in that it
believes the legitimate role of the state includes addressing economic and
social issues such as welfare, health care, and education while simultaneously
expanding civil and political rights. Under social liberalism, the good of the
community is viewed as harmonious with the freedom of the individual. Social
liberal policies have been widely adopted in much of the capitalist world,
particularly following World War II. Social liberal ideas and parties tend to
be considered centrist or centre-left. A reaction against social liberalism in
the late twentieth century, often called neoliberalism, led to monetarist
economic policies and a reduction in government provision of services. However,
this reaction did not result in a return to classical liberalism, as
governments continued to provide social services and retained control over
economic policy. The term "social liberalism" is often used interchangeably
with "modern liberalism". Origins. United Kingdom. By the end of the nineteenth
century, the principles of classical liberalism were challenged by downturns in
economic growth, a growing perception of the evils of poverty, unemployment and
relative deprivation present within modern industrial cities, and the agitation
of organized labour. The ideal of the self-made individual, who through hard
work and talent could make his or her place in the world, seemed increasingly
implausible. A major political reaction against the changes introduced by
industrialization and "laissez-faire" capitalism came from conservatives
concerned about social balance, although socialism later became a more
important force for change and reform. Some Victorian writers—including
Charles Dickens, Thomas Carlyle, and Matthew Arnold—became early influential
critics of social injustice. John Stuart Mill contributed enormously to liberal
thought by combining elements of classical liberalism with what eventually
became known as the new liberalism. The new liberals tried to adapt the old
language of liberalism to confront these difficult circumstances, which they
believed could only be resolved through a broader and more interventionist
conception of the state. An equal right to liberty could not be established
merely by ensuring that individuals did not physically interfere with each
other, or merely by having laws that were impartially formulated and applied.
More positive and proactive measures were required to ensure that every
individual would have an equal chance of success. In the late nineteenth
century and early twentieth century, a group of British thinkers, known as the
New Liberals, made a case against "laissez-faire" classical liberalism and
argued in favor of state intervention in social, economic, and cultural life.
The New Liberals, which included intellectuals like T.H. Green, L.T. Hobhouse,
and John A. Hobson, saw individual liberty as something achievable only under
favorable social and economic circumstances. In their view, the poverty,
squalor, and ignorance in which many people lived made it impossible for
freedom and individuality to flourish. New Liberals believed that these
conditions could be ameliorated only through collective action coordinated by a
strong, welfare-oriented, and interventionist state. Ultimately, the Liberal
governments of Henry Campbell-Bannerman and H.H. Asquith, especially thanks to
Chancellor of the Exchequer and later Prime Minister, David Lloyd George,
established the foundations of the welfare state in the UK before the First
World War. The comprehensive welfare state built in the UK after the Second
World War, although largely accomplished by the Labour Party, was significantly
designed by two Liberals—John Maynard Keynes, who laid the economic
foundations, and William Beveridge, who designed the welfare system. Germany.
In late nineteenth century Germany, liberals established trade unions in order
to help improve working and economic conditions. Leading liberals, such as Lujo
Brentano, established the Social Policy Association in 1873 to promote social
reform. The focus of the liberals primarily centered about free speech, freedom
of assembly, free trade, representative government, equal suffrage, privacy,
and protection of private property, although it included strong opposition to
the welfare state, which they deemed state socialism. Friedrich Naumann, who
was an Association member, later established the National Social Union, which
attempted to address the social question as non-Marxist liberal perspective.
The new group advocated, among other things, increased social welfare
legislation, the right to strike, and profit-sharing in industry. Although the
party was unable to win any seats and soon dissolved, the theories it developed
would remain influential in German liberalism. While some writers describe
Germany's liberalism as social liberalism, others only apply the term to the
policies of the National Social Union. Historically, social liberalism
culminated primarily in two particular parties, namely the imperial German
Progress Party and the Weimarian German Democratic Party, their current heir
being the Free Democratic Party. The term "social liberal" contrasted these
parties with the more conservative and classically liberal, such as the right-
wing of the National Liberal Party, which allied itself with the Conservatives.
France. In France, social liberal theory was developed in the Third Republic by
solidarist thinkers, including Alfred Fouillée and Émile Durkheim, who were
inspired by sociology and influenced radical politicians like Léon Bourgeois.
They explained that a greater division of labor caused greater opportunity and
individualism, but it also inspired a more complex interdependence. They argued
that the individual had a debt to society, promoting progressive taxation to
support public works and welfare schemes. However, they wanted the state to
coordinate rather than to manage, and they encouraged cooperative insurance
schemes among individuals. Their main objective was to remove barriers to
social mobility rather than create a welfare state. United States. In the 1870s
and the 1880s, the American economists Richard Ely, John Bates Clark, and Henry
Carter Adams—influenced both by socialism and the Evangelical Protestant
movement—castigated the conditions caused by industrial factories and
expressed sympathy towards labor unions. None, however, developed a systematic
political philosophy, and they later abandoned their flirtations with socialist
thinking. In 1883, Lester Frank Ward published the two-volume "Dynamic
Sociology" and formalized the basic tenets of social liberalism while at the
same time attacking the laissez-faire policies advocated by Herbert Spencer and
William Graham Sumner. The historian Henry Steele Commager ranked Ward
alongside William James, John Dewey, and Oliver Wendell Holmes and called him
the father of the modern welfare state. Writing from 1884 until the 1930s, John
Dewey—an educator influenced by Hobhouse, Green, and Ward—advocated
socialist methods to achieve liberal goals. Some social liberal ideas were
later incorporated into the New Deal, which developed as a response to the
Great Depression. Implementation. The welfare state grew gradually and unevenly
from the late nineteenth century, but became fully developed following the
Second World War, along with the mixed market economy. Also called "embedded
liberalism", social liberal policies gained broad support across the political
spectrum, because they reduced the disruptive and polarizing tendencies in
society, without challenging the capitalist economic system. Business accepted
social liberalism in the face of widespread dissatisfaction with the boom and
bust cycle of the earlier economic system, and because it seemed to them to be
a lesser evil than more left-wing modes of government. Social liberalism was
characterized by cooperation between big business, government and labor unions.
Government was able to assume a strong role because its power had been
strengthened by the wartime economy. However, the extent to which this occurred
varied considerably among Western democracies. United Kingdom. The first
notable implementation of social liberal policies occurred under the Liberal
Party in Britain from 1906 until 1914. These initiatives became known as the
Liberal reforms. The main elements included pensions for poor elderly people,
health, sickness, and unemployment insurance based on earlier programs in
Germany, and the establishment of labour exchanges. These changes were
accompanied by progressive taxation, particularly in the People's Budget of
1909. The old system of charity—relying on the Poor laws and supplemented by
private charity, public co-operatives, and private insurance companies—was in
crisis, giving the state added impetus for reform. The Liberal Party caucus
elected in 1906 also contained more professionals, including academics and
journalists, sympathetic to social liberalism. The large business owners had
mostly deserted the Liberals for the Conservatives, the latter becoming the
favorite party for commercial interests. The reforms were regularly opposed by
both business interests and trade unions. Liberals most identified with these
reforms were the prime minister H. H. Asquith, John Maynard Keynes, David Lloyd
George (especially as Chancellor of the Exchequer), Winston Churchill (as
President of the Board of Trade) in addition to the civil servant William
Beveridge. Rest of Europe. The post-war governments of other countries in
Western Europe also followed social liberal policies. These policies were
implemented primarily by Christian Democrats and Social Democrats, as liberal
parties in Europe declined in strength from their peak in the nineteenth
century. United States. American political discourse resisted this social turn
in European liberalism. While the economic policies of the New Deal appeared
Keynesian, there was no revision of liberal theory in favor of greater state
initiative. America lacked an effective socialist movement; however, New Deal
policies often appeared radical and were attacked by the right. The separate
development of modern liberalism in the United States is often attributed to
American exceptionalism, which kept mainstream American ideology within a
narrow range. Reversal. Following economic problems in the 1970s, social
liberal thought underwent some transformation. Keynesian economic management
was seen as interfering with the free market while increased welfare spending
that had been funded by higher taxes prompted fears of lower investment, lower
consumer spending, and the creation of a "dependency culture." Trade unions
often caused high wages and industrial disruption, while full employment was
regarded as unsustainable. Writers such as Milton Friedman and Samuel Brittan,
who were influenced by Friedrich Hayek, advocated a reversal of social
liberalism. Their policies, which are often called neoliberalism, had a
significant influence on Western politics, most notably on the governments of
UK Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher and US President Ronald Reagan, who pursued
policies of deregulation of the economy and reduction in spending on social
services. Part of the reason for the collapse of the social liberal coalition
was a challenge in the 1970s from financial interests that could operate
independently of national governments. Another cause was the decline of
organized labor which had formed part of the coalition but was also a support
for left-wing ideologies challenging the liberal consensus. Related to this was
the decline of working class consciousness and the growth of the middle class.
The push by the United States, which had been least accepting of social
liberalism, for trade liberalization further eroded support. Active social
liberal parties and organizations. In Europe, social liberal parties tend to be
small or medium-sized centrist and center-left parties. Examples of successful
European social liberal parties, which have participated in government
coalitions at national or regional levels, are the Liberal Democrats in the
United Kingdom, D66 in the Netherlands, and the Danish Social Liberal Party in
Denmark. In continental European politics, social liberal parties are
integrated in the ALDE group of the European Parliament, which is the third
biggest group at the parliament and includes both social liberal parties and
market liberal parties. Giving an exhaustive list of social liberal parties
worldwide is difficult, largely because political organisations are not always
ideologically pure. Party ideologies often change over time. However, the
following parties and organisations are usually accepted by peers or scholars
as following social liberalism as a core ideology.
