Social class Social class (or simply "class") is a set of concepts in the
social sciences and political theory centered on models of social
stratification in which people are grouped into a set of hierarchical social
categories. Class is an essential object of analysis for sociologists,
political scientists, anthropologists and social historians. However, there is
not a consensus on the best definition of the term "class", and the term has
different contextual meanings. In common parlance, the term "social class," is
usually synonymous with "socio-economic class," defined as: "people having the
same social, economic, or educational status," e.g., "the working class"; "an
emerging professional class." The term "class" is etymologically derived from
the Latin "classis", which was used by census takers to categorize citizens by
wealth, in order to determine military service obligations. In the late 18th
century, the term "class" began to replace classifications such as estates,
rank, and orders as the primary means of organizing society into hierarchical
divisions. This corresponded to a general decrease in significance ascribed to
hereditary characteristics, and increase in the significance of wealth and
income as indicators of position in the social hierarchy. Theoretical models.
Definitions of social classes reflect a number of sociological perspectives,
informed by anthropology, economics, psychology, and sociology. The major
perspectives historically have been Marxism and Structural functionalism. The
common "stratum model of class" divides society into a simple hierarchy of
working class, middle class and upper class. Within academia, two broad schools
of definitions emerge: those aligned with 20th-century sociological stratum
models of class society, and those aligned with the 19th-century historical
materialist economic models of the Marxists and anarchists. Another distinction
can be drawn between "analytical" concepts of social class, such as the
"Marxist" and "Weberian" traditions, and the more "empirical" traditions such
as socio-economic status approach, which notes the correlation of income,
education and wealth with social outcomes without necessarily implying a
particular theory of social structure. Marxist. For Marx, class is a
combination of objective and subjective factors. Objectively, a class shares a
common relationship to the means of production. Subjectively, the members will
necessarily have some perception ("class consciousness") of their similarity
and common interest. Class consciousness is not simply an awareness of one's
own class interest but is also a set of shared views regarding how society
should be organized legally, culturally, socially and politically. These class
relations are reproduced through time. In Marxist theory, the class structure
of the capitalist mode of production is characterized by the conflict between
two main classes: the bourgeoisie, the capitalists who own the means of
production, and the much larger proletariat (or 'working class') who must sell
their own labour power (See also: wage labour). This is the fundamental
economic structure of work and property, a state of inequality that is
normalized and reproduced through cultural ideology. Marxists explain the
history of "civilized" societies in terms of a war of classes between those who
control production and those who produce the goods or services in society. In
the Marxist view of capitalism, this is a conflict between capitalists
(bourgeoisie) and wage-workers (the proletariat). For Marxists, class
antagonism is rooted in the situation that control over social production
necessarily entails control over the class which produces goods—in capitalism
this is the exploitation of workers by the bourgeoisie. Furthermore, "in
countries where modern civilisation has become fully developed, a new class of
petty bourgeois has been formed". "An industrial army of workmen, under the
command of a capitalist, requires, like a real army, officers (managers) and
sergeants (foremen, over-lookers) who, while the work is being done, command in
the name of the capitalist". Marx himself argued that it was the goal of the
proletariat itself to displace the capitalist system with socialism, changing
the social relationships underpinning the class system and then developing into
a future communist society in which: "..the free development of each is the
condition for the free development of all." (Communist Manifesto) This would
mark the beginning of a classless society in which human needs rather than
profit would be motive for production. In a society with democratic control and
production for use, there would be no class, no state and no need for money.
Weberian. Max Weber formulated a three-component theory of stratification, that
saw political power as an interplay between "class", "status" and "group
power". Weber believed that class position was determined by a person's skills
and education, rather than by their relationship to the means of production.
Both Marx and Weber agreed that social stratification was undesirable, however
where Marx believed that stratification would only disappear along with
capitalism and private property, Weber believed that the solution lay in
providing "equal opportunity" within a competitive, capitalist system. The
common three-stratum model. Today, concepts of social class often assume three
general categories: a very wealthy and powerful "upper class" that owns and
controls the means of production; a "middle class" of professional workers,
small business owners, and low-level managers; and a "lower class", who rely on
low-paying wage jobs for their livelihood and often experience poverty. Upper
class. The upper class is the social class composed of those who are wealthy,
well-born, or both. They usually wield the greatest political power. In some
countries, wealth alone is sufficient to allow entry into the upper class. In
others, only people born into certain aristocratic bloodlines are considered
members of the upper class, and those who gain great wealth through commercial
activity are looked down upon as "nouveau riche". In the United Kingdom, for
example, the Upper Classes are the aristocracy and royalty, with wealth playing
a less important role in class status. Many Aristocratic Peerages Titles have
'seats' attached to them, with the holder of the title (e.g. Earl of Bristol)
and his family being the custodians of the house, but not the owners. Many of
these require high expenditures, so wealth is typically needed. Many
Aristocratic Peerages and their homes are parts of estates, owned and run by
the title holder with moneys generated by the land, rents, or other sources
wealth. In America, however, where there is no aristocracy or royalty, the
Upper Class status belongs to the extremely wealthy, the so-called 'super-
rich', though there is some tendency even in America for those with old family
wealth to look down on those who have earned their money in business. The upper
class is generally contained within the wealthiest 1 or 2 percent of the
population. Members of the upper class are often born into it, and are
distinguished by immense wealth which is passed from generation to generation
in the form of estates. Sometimes members of the upper class are called "the
one percent". Middle class. The middle class is the most contested of the three
categorizations, the broad group of people in contemporary society whom fall
socio-economically between the lower class and upper class. One example of the
contestation of this term is that in the United States "middle class" is
applied very broadly and includes people who would elsewhere be considered
lower class. Middle class workers are sometimes called "white-collar workers".
Theorists such as Ralf Dahrendorf have noted the tendency toward an enlarged
middle class in modern Western societies, particularly in relation to the
necessity of an educated work force in technological economies. Perspectives
concerning globalization and neocolonialism, such as dependency theory, suggest
this is due to the shift of low-level labour to developing nations and the
Third World. Lower class. Lower class (occasionally described as working class)
are those employed in low-paying wage jobs with very little economic security.
The working class is sometimes separated into those who are employed but
lacking financial security, and an underclass—those who are long-term
unemployed and/or homeless, especially those receiving welfare from the state.
The latter is analogous to the Marxist term ""lumpenproletariat"". Members of
the working class are sometimes called blue-collar workers. In the United
States, the terms working class and blue-collar may refer to employed and hard-
working members of the middle-middle and lower-middle class, while the upper-
middle class in the United States often refers to employment positions that
require a college or graduate degree. Consequences of class position. A
person's socioeconomic class has wide-ranging effects. It may determine the
schools they are able to attend, the jobs open to them, who they may marry, and
their treatment by police and the courts. Education. A person's social class
has a significant impact on their educational opportunities. Not only are
upper-class parents able to send their children to exclusive schools that are
perceived to be better, but in many places state-supported schools for children
of the upper class are of a much higher quality than those the state provides
for children of the lower classes. This lack of good schools is one factor that
perpetuates the class divide across generations. In 1977, British cultural
theorist Paul Willis published a study titled "Learning to Labor", in which he
investigated the connection between social class and education. In his study,
he found that a group of working class schoolchildren had developed an
antipathy towards the acquisition of knowledge as being outside their class,
and therefore undesirable, perpetuating their presence in the working class.
Health and nutrition. A person's social class has a significant impact on their
physical health, their ability to receive adequate medical care and nutrition,
and their life expectancy. Lower-class people experience a wide array of health
problems as a result of their economic status. They are unable to use health
care as often, and when they do it is of lower quality, even though they
generally tend to experience a much higher rate of health issues. Lower-class
families have higher rates of infant mortality, cancer, cardiovascular disease,
and disabling physical injuries. Additionally, poor people tend to work in much
more hazardous conditions, yet generally have much less (if any) health
insurance provided for them, as compared to middle and upper class workers.
Employment. The conditions at a person's job vary greatly depending on class.
Those in the upper-middle class and middle class enjoy greater freedoms in
their occupations. They are usually more respected, enjoy more diversity, and
are able to exhibit some authority. Those in lower classes tend to feel more
alienated and have lower work satisfaction overall. The physical conditions of
the workplace differ greatly between classes. While middle-class workers may
"suffer alienating conditions" or "lack of job satisfaction", blue-collar
workers are more apt to suffer alienating, often routine, work with obvious
physical health hazards, injury, and even death. Class conflict. For Marx, the
history of class society was a history of class conflict. He pointed to the
successful rise of the bourgeoisie, and the necessity of revolutionary
violence—a heightened form of class conflict—in securing the bourgeoisie
rights that supported the capitalist economy. Marx believed that the
exploitation and poverty inherent in capitalism were a pre-existing form of
class conflict. Marx believed that wage labourers would need to revolt to bring
about a more equitable distribution of wealth and political power. Relationship
between race and class. Race and other large-scale groupings can also influence
class standing. The association of particular ethnic groups with class statuses
is common in many societies. As a result of conquest or internal ethnic
differentiation, a ruling class is often ethnically homogenous and particular
races or ethnic groups in some societies are legally or customarily restricted
to occupying particular class positions. Which ethnicities are considered as
belonging to high or low classes varies from society to society. In modern
societies strict legal links between ethnicity and class have been drawn, such
as in apartheid, the caste system in Africa, and in the position of the
Burakumin in Japanese society.
