Social democracy Social democracy is a political ideology that considers itself
to be a form of reformist democratic socialism. Common social democratic
policies include advocacy of universal social rights to attain universally-
accessible public services such as: education, health care, workers'
compensation, and other services including child care and care for the elderly.
Social democracy is connected with the trade union labour movement and supports
collective bargaining rights for workers. Most social democratic parties are
affiliated with the Socialist International. Social democracy was developed by
revisionist Marxist Eduard Bernstein who opposed orthodox Marxism's support of
revolution and class conflict, claiming that socialism could be achieved
through evolutionary means via representative democracy and cooperation between
people regardless of class. Bernstein claimed that a mixed economy of public,
cooperative and private enterprise would be necessary for a long period of time
before private enterprises would evolve of their own accord into cooperative
enterprise. Non-Marxist adherents to social democracy arose, including the
Fabians in Britain. The development of liberal socialism that began in the
1920s by figures such as G. D. H. Cole, R. H. Tawney, and Carlo Rosselli that
fused liberal and socialist ideals while rejecting both Marxism and state
socialism, influenced social democracy, including influencing contemporary
social democrats in favour of the Third Way. By the post-World War II period,
most social democrats in Europe had abandoned their ideological connection to
Marxism. Critics of contemporary social democracy such as Jonas Hinnfors argue
that when social democracy abandoned Marxism it also abandoned socialism and
has become in effect a liberal capitalist movement. Those who believe that
social democracy abandoned socialism contend that it did so in the 1930s by
endorsing Keynesian welfare capitalism. Socialist political theorist Michael
Harrington argues that social democracy historically supported Keynesianism as
part of a "social democratic compromise" between capitalism and socialism. This
compromise created welfare states which Harrington contends that, although it
did not allow for the immediate creation of socialism, it "recognized
noncapitalist, and even anticapitalist, principles of human need over and above
the imperatives of profit". More recently, social democrats in favour of the
Third Way have been accused of having endorsed capitalism, including by anti-
Third Way social democrats who have accused Third Way proponents such as
Anthony Giddens of being anti-social democratic and anti-socialist in practice.
History. Pre-reformist usage of the term "social democracy", 1848-1889. "They
have two distinguishing characteristics. The vast majority of them are
laborers, and, as a rule, they expect the violent overthrow of existing
institutions by revolution to precede the introduction of the socialistic
state. I would not, by any means, say that they are all revolutionists, but the
most of them undoubtedly are. * * * "The most general demands of the social
democrats are the following: The state should exist exclusively for the
laborers; land and capital must become collective property, and production be
carried on unitedly. Private competition, in the ordinary sense of the term, is
to cease." Many parties in this era described themselves as "social
democratic," including the General German Workers' Association and the Social
Democratic Workers' Party of Germany (which merged to form the Social
Democratic Party of Germany), the British Social Democratic Federation, and the
Russian Social Democratic Labour Party. The term "social democracy" continued
to be used in this context up to the time of the Bolshevik Revolution of
November 1917, at which time the term "communist" came into vogue for
individuals and organizations espousing a revolutionary road to socialism.
Second International era, 1889-1914. The modern social democratic movement came
into being through a division within the socialist movement, this division can
be described as a parting of ways between those who insisted upon political
revolution as a precondition for the achievement of socialist goals and those
who maintained that a gradual or evolutionary path to socialism was both
possible and desirable. One of the key founders of contemporary social
democracy was Eduard Bernstein, a proponent of reformist socialism and an
adherent of Marxism. The term "revisionist" was applied to Bernstein by his
critics who referred to themselves as "orthodox" Marxists, even though
Bernstein claimed that his principles were consistent with Karl Marx's and
Friedrich Engels' stances, especially in their later years when Marx and Engels
advocated that socialism should be achieved through parliamentary democratic
means where-ever possible. Revisionists have criticized orthodox Marxism and
particularly its founder Karl Kautsky, for having disregarded Marx's view of
the necessity of evolution of capitalism to achieve socialism by replacing it
with an "either/or" polarization between capitalism and socialism; for
disregarding Marx's emphasis on the role of parliamentary democracy in
achieving socialism; as well as criticizing Kautsky for his idealism of state
socialism. Bernstein had held close association to Marx and Engels, but he saw
flaws in Marxian thinking and began such criticism when he investigated and
challenged the Marxian materialist theory of history. He rejected significant
parts of Marxian theory that were based upon Hegelian metaphysics, he rejected
the Hegelian dialectical perspective. Bernstein declared that the massive and
homogeneous working-class claimed in the "Communist Manifesto" did not exist,
and that contrary to claims of a proletarian majority emerging, the middle-
class was growing under capitalism and not disappearing as Marx had claimed.
Bernstein noted that the working-class was not homogeneous but heterogeneous,
with divisions and factions within it, including socialist and non-socialist
trade unions. Marx himself later in his life acknowledged that the middle-class
was not disappearing, in his work "Theories of Surplus Value". However due to
the popularity of the "Communist Manifesto" and the obscurity of "Theories of
Surplus Value", Marx's acknowledgement of this error is not well known. Steger,
"The Quest for Evolutionary Socialism," pg. 137. Steger, "The Quest for
Evolutionary Socialism," pg. 80. ""It would be completely mad to burden itself
with the additional tasks of so complex a nature as the setting up and
controlling of comprehensive state production centers on a mass scale – quite
apart from the fact that only certain specific branches of production can be
run on a national basis…Competition would have to be reckoned with, at least
in the transitional period."" Eduard Bernstein. Christopher Pierson. Hard
choices: social democracy in the twenty-first century. Cambridge, England, UK;
Oxford, England, UK; Malden, Massachusetts, USA: Polity Press, 2001. Pp. 25.
Another prominent figure who influenced social democracy, was French
revisionist Marxist and reformist socialist Jean Jaurès. During the 1904
Congress of the Second International, Jaurès challenged orthodox Marxist
August Bebel, the mentor of Kautsky, over his promotion of monolithic socialist
tactics. Jaurès claimed that no coherent socialist platform could be equally
applicable to different countries and regions due to different political
systems in them; noting that Bebel's homeland of Germany at the time was very
authoritarian and had limited parliamentary democracy. He compared the limited
political influence of socialism in government in Germany to the substantial
influence that socialism had gained in France due to its stronger parliamentary
democracy. He claimed that the example of the political differences between
Germany and France demonstrated that monolithic socialist tactics were
impossible, given the political differences of various countries. World War I,
revolutions and counterrevolutions, 1914-1920. As tensions between Europe's
Great Powers escalated in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, Bernstein
feared that Germany's arms race with other powers was threatening the
possibility of a major war. Bernstein's fears were realized with the outbreak
of World War I. Immediately after the outbreak of World War I, Bernstein
traveled from Germany to Britain to meet with British Labour Party leader
Ramsay MacDonald. Bernstein regarded the outbreak of the war with great dismay,
but even though the two countries were at war with one another, MacDonald
honoured Bernstein at the meeting. In spite of Bernstein's and other social
democrats' attempts to secure the unity of the Second International, with
national tensions increasing between the countries at war, the Second
International collapsed in 1914. Anti-war members of the Social Democratic
Party of Germany (SPD) refused to support finances being given to the German
government to support the war. However a nationalist-revisionist faction of SPD
members led by Friedrich Ebert, Gustav Noske, and Philipp Scheidemann,
supported the war, arguing that Germany had the "right to its territorial
defense" from the "destruction of Tsarist despotism". The SPD's decision to
support the war, including Bernstein's decision to support it, was heavily
influenced by the fact that the German government lied to the German people, as
it claimed that the only reason Germany had declared war on Russia was because
Russia was preparing to invade East Prussia, when in fact this was not the
case. Jaurès opposed France's intervention in the war and took a pacifist
stance, but was soon assassinated in 1914. Bernstein soon resented the war and
by October 1914 was convinced of the German government's war guilt; and
contacted the orthodox Marxists of the SPD, to unite to push the SPD to take an
anti-war stance. Kautsky attempted to put aside his differences with Bernstein
and join forces in opposing the war, and Kautsky praised him for becoming a
firm anti-war proponent, saying that although Bernstein had previously
supported "civic" and "liberal" forms of nationalism, his committed anti-war
position made him the "standard-bearer of the internationalist idea of social
democracy". The nationalist position by the SPD leadership under Ebert refused
to rescind. In Britain, the British Labour Party became divided on the war.
Labour Party leader Ramsay MacDonald was one of a handful of British MPs who
had denounced Britain's declaration of war on Germany. MacDonald was denounced
by the pro-war press on accusations that he was "pro-German" and a pacifist,
both charges that he denied. In response to pro-war sentiments in the Labour
Party, MacDonald resigned from being its leader and associated himself with the
Independent Labour Party. Arthur Henderson became the new leader of the Labour
Party, and served as a cabinet minister in Prime Minister Asquith's war
government. After the February Revolution of 1917 in Russia (not to be confused
with the October Revolution) in which the Tsarist regime in Russia was
overthrown by the Socialist-Revolutionary Party, a democratic socialist
movement led by Alexander Kerensky, MacDonald visited the Russian Provisional
Government in June 1917, seeking to persuade Russia to oppose the war and seek
peace. His efforts to unite the Russian Provisional Government against the war
failed after Russia fell back into political violence resulting in the October
Revolution in which the Bolsheviks led Vladimir Lenin's rise to power. Though
MacDonald critically responded to the Bolsheviks' political violence and rise
to power by warning of "the danger of anarchy in Russia", he gave political
support to the Bolshevik regime until the end of the war because he then
thought that a democratic internationalism could be revived. The British Labour
Party's trade union affiliated membership soared during World War I. Henderson
with the assistance of Sidney Webb designed a new constitution for the British
Labour Party, in which it adopted a strongly left-wing platform in 1918 to
ensure that it would not lose support to the new Communist Party, exemplified
by Clause IV of the new constitution of the Labour Party. The overthrow of the
Tsarist regime in Russia by Kerensky's Socialist-Revolutionaries in February
1917 impacted politics in Germany, as it ended the legitimation used by Ebert
and other pro-war SPD members that Germany was in the war against a reactionary
Russian government. With the overthrow of the Tsar and revolutionary socialist
agitation increased in Russia, such events influenced socialists in Germany.
With rising bread shortages in Germany amid war rationing, mass strikes
occurred beginning in April 1917 with 300,000 strikers taking part in a strike
in Berlin. The strikers demanded bread, freedom, peace, and the formation of
workers' councils as was being done in Russia. Amidst the German public's
uproar, the SPD alongside the Progressives and the Catholic labour movement in
the Reichstag put forward the "Peace Resolution" on 19 July 1917 that called
for a compromise peace to end the war, that was passed by a majority of members
of the Reichstag. The German High Command opposed the Peace Resolution, however
it did seek to end the war with Russia, and presented the Treaty of Brest-
Litovsk to the Bolshevik regime in 1918 that agreed to the terms and the
Reichstag passed the treaty, that included the support of the SPD, the
Progressives, and the Catholic political movement. By late 1918 the war
situation for Germany had become hopeless, and Kaiser Wilhelm II was pressured
to make peace. Wilhelm II appointed a new cabinet that included SPD members in
it. At the same time the Imperial Naval Command was determined to make a heroic
last stand against the British Royal Navy, and on 24 October 1918 it issued
orders for the German Navy to depart to confront while the sailors refused,
resulting in the Kiel Mutiny. The Kiel Mutiny resulted in the German Revolution
of 1918–1919. Faced with military failure and revolution, Chancellor Max
Prince Maximillian of Baden resigned, giving SPD leader Ebert the position of
Chancellor, Wihelm II abdicated the German throne immediately afterwards, and
the German High Command officials Paul von Hindenburg and Erich Ludendorff
resigned whilst refusing to end the war to save face, leaving the Ebert
government and the SPD-majority Reichstag to be forced to make the inevitable
peace with the Allies and take the blame for having lost the war. With the
abdication of Wilhelm II, Ebert declared Germany to be a republic and signed
the armistice that ended World War I on 11 November 1918. The new social
democratic government in Germany faced political violence in Berlin by a
movement of communist revolutionaries known as the Spartacist League who sought
to repeat the feat of Lenin and the Bolsheviks in Russia, by overthrowing the
German government. Tensions between the governing "Majority" Social Democrats
(led by Ebert) versus the strongly left-wing elements of the Independent Social
Democratic Party (USPD) and communists over Ebert's refusal to immediately
reform the German Army, resulted in the "January rising" by the newly formed
Communist Party of Germany (KPD) and the USPD, resulting in communists
mobilizing a large workers' demonstration. The SPD responded by holding a
counterdemonstration that was effective in demonstrating support for the
government, and the USPD soon withdrew its support for the rising. However the
communists continued to revolt, and between 12 to 28 January 1919, communist
forces had seized control of several government buildings in Berlin. Ebert
responded by requesting that Defense Minister Gustav Noske take charge of loyal
soldiers to fight the communists and secure the government. Ebert was furious
with the communists' intransigence and said that he wished "to teach the
radicals a lesson they would never forget". Noske was able to rally groups of
mostly reactionary ex-soldiers, known as the "Freikorps" who were eager to
fight the communists. The situation soon went completely out of control when
the recruited "Freikorps" went on a violent rampage against workers and
murdered the communist leaders Karl Liebenknecht and Rosa Luxembourg. The
atrocities by the government-recruited "Freikorps" against the communist
revolutionaries badly tarnished the reputation of the SPD and strengthened the
confidence of reactionary forces. In spite of this, the SPD was able to win the
largest number of seats in the parliamentary election held on 19 January 1919
and Ebert was elected President of Germany, but the USPD in response to the
atrocities committed by the government-recruited "Freikorps", refused to
support the SPD government. Due to the unrest in Berlin, the construction of
the constitution of the new German republic was created in the city of Weimar,
and is referred to as the Weimar Republic. Upon founding the new government,
President Ebert cooperated with liberal members of his coalition government to
create the constitution, Ebert sought to begin a program of nationalizations of
some parts of the economy. Political unrest and violence continued and the
government's continued reliance on the help of the "Freikorps"
counterrevolutionaries to fight the communist revolutionaries continued to
alienate potential left-wing support for the SPD. The SPD coalition
government's acceptance of the harsh peace conditions of the Treaty of
Versailles in June 1919, infuriated the right, including the "Freikorps" that
had previously been willing to cooperate with the government to fight the
communists. In the German parliamentary election of June 1919, the SPD share of
the vote declined significantly. In March 1920, a group of right-wing
militarists led by Wolfgang Kapp and former German military chief-of-staff
Erich Ludendorff initiated a briefly successful putsch against the German
government, in what became known as the Kapp Putsch, however the putsch failed
and the government was restored. Interwar period and the Great Depression,
1920-1939. At a global level, after World War I several attempts were made to
re-found the Second International that collapsed amidst national divisions in
the war. The Vienna International formed in 1921 attempted to end the rift
between reformist socialists - including social democrats; and revolutionary
socialists - including communists, and particularly Mensheviks. However a
crisis soon erupted that involved the new country of Georgia led by a social
democratic government led by President Noe Zhordania, that had declared itself
independent from Russia in 1918 whose government had been endorsed by multiple
social democratic parties. At founding meeting of the Vienna International, the
discussions were interrupted by the arrival of a telegram from President
Zhordania who said that Georgia was under invasion by Bolshevik Russia.
Delegates attending the International's founding meeting were stunned,
particularly the Bolshevik representative from Russia, Mecheslav Bronsky, who
refused to believe this and left the meeting to seek confirmation of this, but
upon confirmation Bronsky did not return to the meeting. The overall response
from the Vienna International was divided, the Mensheviks demanded that the
International immediately condemn Russia's aggression against Georgia, but the
majority as represented by German delegate Alfred Henke sought to exercise
caution and said that the delegates should wait for confirmation. Russia's
invasion of Georgia completely violated the non-aggression treaty signed
between Lenin and Zhordania, as well as violating Georgia's sovereignty by
annexing Georgia directly into the Russian Soviet Federated Socialist Republic.
Tensions between Bolsheviks and social democrats worsened with the Kronstadt
rebellion. Unrest by leftists against the Bolshevik government in Russia
resulted in the Kronstadt rebellion, Russian social democrats distributed
leaflets calling for a general strike against the Bolshevik regime, the
Bolsheviks responded by forcefully repressing the rebels. Relations between the
social democratic movement and Bolshevik Russia descended into complete
antagonism in response to the Russian famine of 1921 and the Bolsheviks'
violent repression of opposition to their government. Multiple social
democratic parties were disgusted with Russia's Bolshevik regime, particularly
Germany's SPD and the Netherlands' Social Democratic Workers' Party (SDAP) that
denounced the Bolsheviks for defiling socialism and declared that the
Bolsheviks had "driven out the best of our comrades, thrown them into prison
and put them to death". In May 1923, social democrats united to found their own
international, the Labour and Socialist International (LSI), founded in
Hamburg, Germany. The LSI declared that all its affiliated political parties
would retain autonomy to make their own decisions regarding internal affairs of
their countries; but that international affairs would be addressed by the LSI.
The LSI addressed the issue of the rise of fascism, by declaring the LSI to be
anti-fascist. In response to the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War in 1936
between the democratically-elected Republican government versus the
authoritarian right-wing Nationalists led by Francisco Franco with the support
of Fascist Italy and Nazi Germany, the Executive Committee of the LSI declared
not only its support for the Spanish Republic but also that it supported the
Spanish government having the right to purchase arms to fight Franco's
Nationalist forces. LSI-affiliated parties, including the British Labour Party
declared their support for the Spanish Republic. However the LSI was criticized
on the left for failing to put action into its anti-fascist rhetoric. The stock
market crash of 1929 that began an economic crisis in the United States that
globally spread and became the Great Depression profoundly affected economic
policymaking. The collapse of the gold standard and the emergence of mass
unemployment resulted in multiple governments recognizing the need for state
macroeconomic intervention to reduce unemployment as well as economic
intervention to stabilize prices, a proto-Keynesianism that John Maynard Keynes
himself would soon publicly endorse. Multiple social democratic parties
declared the need for substantial investment in economic infrastructure
projects to respond to unemployment, and creating social control over money
flow. Furthermore, social democratic parties declared that the Great Depression
demonstrated the need for substantial macroeconomic planning while their pro-
property rights opponents staunchly opposed this. However attempts by social
democratic governments to achieve this were unsuccessful due to the ensuing
political instability in their countries from the depression, the British
Labour Party became internally split over the policies while Germany's SPD
government did not have the time to implement such policies as Germany's
politics turned to violent civil unrest in which the Nazis rose to power in
1933 and dismantled parliamentary democracy. A major development for social
democracy was the victories of several social democratic parties in
Scandinavia, particularly the Social Democratic Party of Sweden (SAP) in the
1920 Swedish election. The SAP was elected to a minority government. It created
a Socialization Committee that declared support for a mixed economy that
combined the best of private initiative with social ownership or control, it
supported substantial socialization "of all necessary natural resources,
industrial enterprises, credit institutions, transportation and communication
routes" that would be gradually transferred to the state. It permitted private
ownership outside of these areas. In 1922 Ramsay MacDonald returned to the
leadership of the Labour Party from the Independent Labour Party. in the 1924
British election the Labour Party won a plurality of seats and was elected as a
minority government but required assistance from the Liberal Party to have a
majority of the parliament. Opponents of the Labour Party accused the party of
communist sympathies. Prime Minister MacDonald responded to these allegations
by stressing the party's commitment to reformist gradualism and openly opposing
the radical wing in the party. MacDonald emphasized that the Labour minority
government's first and foremost commitment was to uphold democratic responsible
government over all other policies. MacDonald emphasized this because he knew
that any attempt to pass major socialist legislation in a minority government
status would endanger the new government because it would be opposed and
blocked by the Conservatives and the Liberals who together held a majority of
seats. The Labour Party had risen to power in the aftermath of Britain's severe
recession of 1921-1922, with the economy beginning to recover, British trade
unions demanded that their wages be restored from the cuts they took in the
recession. The trade unions soon became deeply dissatisfied with the MacDonald
government and labour unrest and threat of strikes arose in transportation
sector, including docks and railways. MacDonald viewed the situation as a
crisis, consulting the unions in advance to warn them that his government would
have to use strikebreakers if the situation continued. The anticipated clash
between the government and the unions was averted, however the situation
alienated the unions from the MacDonald government. MacDonald's most
controversial action was having Britain recognize the government of the Soviet
Union in February 1924. The British Conservative press, including the "Daily
Mail" used this to promote a red scare, claiming that the Labour government's
recognition of the Soviet Union proved that Labour held pro-Bolshevik
sympathies. The British Labour Party lost the 1924 election and a Conservative
government was elected. Though MacDonald faced multiple challenges to his
leadership of the party, the party stabilized by 1927 as a capable opposition
party to the Conservative government. MacDonald released a new political
programme for the party titled "Labour and the Nation" (1928). The Labour Party
returned to government in 1929, but soon faced the economic catastrophe of the
stock market crash of 1929. In the 1920s, SPD policymaker and Marxist Rudolf
Hilferding proposed substantial policy changes in the SPD as well as
influencing social democratic and socialist theory. Hilferding was an
influential Marxian socialist both in social democracy and outside it, such as
his pamphlet titled "Imperialism" influencing Lenin's own conception of
imperialism in the 1910s. Prior to the 1920s Hilferding declared that
capitalism had evolved beyond what had been laissez-faire capitalism into what
he called "organized capitalism". Organized capitalism was based upon trusts
and cartels controlled by financial institutions that could no longer make
money within their countries' national boundaries and thus needed to export to
survive, resulting in support for imperialism. Hilferding described that while
early capitalism promoted itself as peaceful and based on free trade, the era
of organized capitalism was aggressive and said that "in the place of humanity
there came the idea of the strength and power of the state". He said that this
had the consequence of creating effective collectivization within capitalism
and had prepared the way for socialism. Originally Hilferding's vision of a
socialism replacing organized capitalism was highly Kautskyan in assuming an
either/or perspective, expecting a catastrophic clash between organized
capitalism versus socialism. However by the 1920s, Hilferding became an
adherent to promoting a gradualist evolution of capitalism into socialism. He
then praised organized capitalism for being a step towards socialism, saying at
the SPD congress in 1927 that ""organized capitalism"" is nothing less than
""the replacement of the capitalist principle of free competition by the
socialist principle of planned production"". He went on to say that ""the
problem is posed to our generation: with the help of the state, with the help
of conscious social direction, to transform the economy organized and led by
capitalists into an economy directed by the democratic state."". In the 1930s,
the SPD began to transition away from revisionist Marxism towards liberal
socialism beginning in the 1930s. After the party was banned by the Nazis in
1933, the SPD acted in exile through the Sopade. In 1934 the Sopade began to
publish material that indicated that the SPD was turning towards liberal
socialism. Sopade member Curt Geyer was a prominent proponent of liberal
socialism within the Sopade, and declared that Sopade represented the tradition
of Weimar Republic social democracy - liberal democratic socialism, and
declared that Sopade's held true to its mandate of traditional liberal
principles combined with the political realism of socialism. After the
restoration of democracy in West Germany, The SPD's Godesberg Program in 1959
eliminated the party's remaining Marxist-aligned policies. The SPD then became
officially based upon "freiheitlicher Sozialismus" (liberal socialism). West
German Chancellor Willy Brandt has been identified as a liberal socialist. The
only social democratic governments in Europe that remained by the early 1930s
were in Scandinavia. In the 1930s several Swedish social democratic leadership
figures, including former Swedish Prime Minister Rickard Sandler - the
secretary and chairman of the Socialization Committee, and Nils Karleby,
rejected earlier SAP socialization policies pursued in the 1920s for being to
extreme. Karlby and Sanders developed a new conception of social democratic
socialism: the social market economy that called for gradual socialization and
redistribution of purchasing power, provision of educational opportunity,
support of property rights, permitting private enterprise on the condition that
it adheres to the principle that the resources of which it disposes are in
reality public means, and the creation of a broad category of social welfare
rights. The new SAP government of 1932, replaced the previous government's
universal commitment to a balanced budget to a Keynesian-like commitment to a
balanced budget within a business cycle. Unlike the 1921-1923 SAP governments
that had run large deficits, after a strong increase in state expenditure in
1933, the SAP government reduced Sweden's budget deficit, the government had
scheduled Sweden to have its budget deficit eliminated in seven years, however
it took only three years to eliminate the deficit and Sweden held a budget
surplus from 1936 to 1938. However this policy was criticized because although
the budget deficit had been eliminated, major unemployment still remained in
Sweden. In the Americas from the 1920s to 1930s, social democracy was rising as
a major political force. In Mexico, several social democratic governments and
presidents were elected from the 1920s to the 1930s. The most important Mexican
social democratic government of this time was that led by President Lázaro
Cárdenas and the Party of the Mexican Revolution whose government initiated
agrarian reform that broke up vast aristocratic estates and redistributing
property to peasants. Cárdenas was deeply committed to social democracy, but
was criticized by his left-wing opponents for being pro-capitalist due to his
personal association with a wealthy family and for being corrupt due to his
government's exemption from agrarian reform of the estate held by former
Mexican President Alvaro Obregón. Political violence in Mexico had become
serious in the 1920s with the Cristero War in which right-wing reactionary
clericals fought against the left-wing government that was attempting to
institute secularization of Mexico. Furthermore, Cardenas' government openly
supported Spain's Republican government while opposing Francisco Franco's
Nationalists during the Spanish Civil War. During the Spanish Civil War,
Cárdenas staunchly asserted that Mexico was progressive and socialist -
working with socialists of various types including communists, and accepted
refugees from Spain as well as accepting communist renegade Leon Trotsky as a
refugee after Joseph Stalin removed Trotsky and sought to have him killed.
Cárdenas strengthened the rights of Mexico's labour movement, nationalized
foreign oil companies, and controversially supported peasants in their struggle
against landlords by allowing them to form militias to fight the private armies
of landlords in the country. Cárdenas' actions deeply aggravated right-wing
reactionaries and there was fear that Mexico would succumb to civil war.
Cardenas stepped down as Mexican President and supported a compromise
presidential candidate who held support from business interests, in order to
avoid further antagonizing the right-wing that could have caused a civil war.
Cold War period (1945-1979). India upon becoming a sovereign state in 1947,
elected the social democratic Indian National Congress to government with its
leader Jawaharlal Nehru becoming Indian Prime Minister. Nehru declared "In
Europe, we see many countries have advanced very far on the road to socialism.
I am not referring to the communist countries but to those which may be called
parliamentary, social democratic countries." In power, Nehru's government
emphasized state-guided national development of India, he took inspiration from
social democracy, though India's newly formed Planning Commission also took
inspiration from post-1949 China's agricultural policies. Neoliberalism and
social democratic response, contemporary period, 1979 to present. The economic
crisis in the Western world during the mid to late 1970s resulted in the rise
of neoliberalism and politicians elected on neoliberal platforms such as
British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher and US President Ronald Reagan. The
rise in support for neoliberalism raised questions over the political viability
of social democracy, such as sociologist Ralf Dahrendorf predicting the "end of
the social democratic century". In 1985, an agreement was made between several
social democratic parties in the Western bloc countries of Belgium, Denmark,
and the Netherlands; with the communist parties of the Eastern Bloc countries
of Bulgaria, East Germany, and Hungary; to have multilateral discussions on
trade, nuclear disarmament and other issues. In 1989, the Socialist
International adopted its present Declaration of Principles. The Declaration of
Principles addressed issues concerning the "internationalization of the
economy". The Declaration of Principles defined its interpretation of the
nature of socialism. It stated that socialist values and vision include "a
peaceful and democratic world society combining freedom, justice and
solidarity". It defined the rights and freedoms it supported, stating:
"Socialists protect the inalienable right to life and to physical safety, to
freedom of belief and free expression of opinion, to freedom of association and
to protection from torture and degradation. Socialists are committed to achieve
freedom from hunger and want, genuine social security, and the right to work."
However it also clarified that it did not promote any fixed and permanent
definition for socialism, stating: "Socialists do not claim to possess the
blueprint for some final and fixed society which cannot be changed, reformed or
further developed. In a movement committed to democratic self-determination
there will always be room for creativity since each people and every generation
must set its own goals." The 1989 Socialist International congress was
politically significant in that members of Communist Party of the Soviet Union
during the reformist leadership of Mikhail Gorbachev, attended the congress.
The SI's new Declaration of Principles abandoned previous statements made in
the Frankfurt Declaration of 1951 against Soviet-style communism. After the
congress, the Soviet state newspaper "Pravda" noted that thanks to dialogue
between the Soviet Communist Party and the SI since 1979 that "the positions of
the CPSU and the Socialist International on nuclear disarmament issues today
virtually coincide". The collapse of the Marxist-Leninist regimes in Eastern
Europe after the end of the Cold War, and the creation of multiparty democracy
in many many of those countries, resulted in the creation of multiple social
democratic parties. Though many of these parties did not achieve initial
electoral success, they became a significant part of the political landscape of
Eastern Europe. In Western Europe, the prominent Italian Communist Party
transformed itself into the post-communist Democratic Party of the Left in
1991. A highly controversial development in social democracy occurred in the
1990s, with the development of Third Way politics and social democratic
adherents of it. The social democratic variant of the Third Way has been
advocated by its proponents as an alternative to both capitalism and what it
regards as the traditional forms of socialism, including Marxist socialism and
state socialism, that Third Way social democrats reject. It officially
advocates ethical socialism, reformism, gradualism - that includes advocating
the humanized capitalism, a mixed economy, political pluralism, and liberal
democracy. Left-wing opponents of Third Way social democracy claim that it is
not a form of socialism, and claim that it represents social democrats who
responded to the New Right by accepting capitalism. The Third Way has been
strongly criticized within the social democratic movement. Third Way supporter
and former British Prime Minister Tony Blair when he was a British Labour Party
MP wrote in a Fabian pamphlet in 1994 of the existence of two prominent
variants of socialism: one is based on a Marxist economic determinist and
collectivist tradition that he rejected, and the other is an "ethical
socialism" that he supported, that was based on values of "social justice, the
equal worth of each citizen, equality of opportunity, community". Prominent
Third Way proponent Anthony Giddens views conventional socialism as essentially
having become obsolete. However Giddens claims that a viable form of socialism
was advocated by Anthony Crosland in his major work "The Future of Socialism"
(1956). Giddens has complimented Crosland as well as Thomas Humphrey Marshall
for promoting a viable socialism. Giddens views what he considers the
conventional form of socialism - state socialism - that defines socialism as a
theory of economic management, as nor longer viable. Giddens rejects what he
considers top-down socialism as well as rejecting neoliberalism. Giddens
criticizes conventional socialism for its common advocacy that socialization of
production, as achieved by central planning, can overcome the irrationalities
of capitalism. Giddens claims that this claim "can no longer be defended". He
says that with the collapse of legitimacy of centrally-planned socialization of
production, "With its dissolution, the radical hopes for by socialism are as
dead as the Old Conservatism that opposed them". Giddens says that although
there have been proponents of market socialism who have rejected such central
planned socialism as well as being resistant to capitalism, that "There are
good reasons, in my view, to argue that market socialism isn't a realistic
possibility". Giddens makes clear that Third Way as he envisions it, is not
market socialist and says "There is no Third Way of this sort, and with this
realization the history of socialism as the avant-garde of political theory
comes to a close.". Paul Cammack has condemned the Third Way as conceived by
Anthony Giddens as being a complete attack upon the foundations of social
democracy and socialism in which Giddens has sought to replace them with
capitalism. Cammack claims that Giddens devotes more energy into criticizing
conventional social democracy and conventional socialism, including Giddens'
claim that conventional socialism has "died" because Marx's vision of a new
economy with wealth spread in an equitable way is not possible, while at the
same time making no criticism of capitalism. As such, Cammack condemns Giddens
and his Third Way for being anti-social-democratic, anti-socialist, and pro-
capitalist that Giddens disguises in rhetoric to make appealing within social
democracy. British political theorist Robert Corfe who was in the past a social
democratic proponent of a new socialism free of class-based prejudices,
criticized both Marxist classists and Third Way proponents within the Labour
Party. Corfe has denounced the Third Way as developed by Giddens for
"intellectual emptiness and ideological poverty". Corfe has despondently noted
and agreed with former long-term British Labour Party MP Alice Mahon's
statement in which she said "Labour is the party of bankers, not workers. The
party has lost its soul, and what has replace it is harsh, American style
politics..." Corfe claims that the failure to develop a new socialism has
resulted in what he considers the "death of socialism" that left social
capitalism as only feasible alternative. Former SPD chairman Oskar Lafontaine
condemned then-SPD leader and German Chancellor Gerhard Schröder for his Third
Way policies, saying that the SPD under Schröder had adopted "a radical change
of direction towards a policy of neoliberalism". After resigning from the SPD,
Lafontaine co-founded The Left. The Left was founded out of a merger of the
Party of Democratic Socialism (PDS) and Labour and Social Justice – The
Electoral Alternative (WASG) - a breakaway faction from the SPD. The Left has
been controversial because as a direct successor to the PDS, it is also a
direct successor of former East Germany's ruling Marxist-Leninist Socialist
Unity Party (SED) that transformed into the PDS after the end of the Cold War.
However the PDS did not continue the SED's policies, as the PDS adopted
policies to appeal to democratic socialists, greens, feminists, and pacifists.
Lafontaine said in an interview that he supports the type of social democracy
pursued by Willy Brandt but claims that the creation of The Left was necessary
because "formerly socialist and social democratic parties" had effectively
accepted neoliberalism. The Left grew in strength and in the 2009 German
parliamentary election gained 11 percent of the vote while the SPD gained 23
percent of the vote. Lafontaine has noted that the founding of The Left in
Germany has resulted in emulation in other countries, with several Left parties
being founded in Greece, Portugal, Netherlands, and Syria. Lafontaine claims
that a "de facto" British Left movement exists, identifying British Green Party
MEP Caroline Lucas as holding similar values. Others have claimed that social
democracy needs to move past the Third Way, such as Olaf Cramme and Patrick
Diamond in their book "After the Third Way: The Future of Social Democracy in
Europe" (2012). Cramme and Diamond recognize that the Third Way arose as an
attempt to break down the traditional dichotomy within social democracy between
state intervention and markets in the economy, however they contend that the
global financial crisis of the late 2000s requires that social democracy must
rethink its political economy. Cramme and Diamond note that optimism in
economic planning amongst socialists was strong in the early to mid-twentieth
century, but declined with the rise of the neoliberal right that both attacked
economic planning and associated the left with economic planning. They claim
that this formed the foundation of the "Right's moral trap" in which the
neoliberal right attacks on economic planning policies by the left, that
provokes a defense of such planning by the left as being morally necessary, and
ends with the right then rebuking such policies as being inherently
economically incompetent while presenting itself as the champion of economic
competence. Cramme and Diamond state that social democracy has four different
strategies both to address the economic crisis in global markets at present
that it could adopt in response: market conforming, market complimenting,
market resisting, market substituting, and market transforming. Cramme and
Diamond identify market conforming as being equivalent to historic social
democratic policymaker Philip Snowden's desire for a very moderate socialist
agenda based above all upon fiscal prudence, as Snowden insisted that socialism
had to build upon fiscal prudence or else it would not be achieved. In the
2000s (decade) and 2010s, several major European social democratic parties lost
support, such as the defeat of the Social Democratic Party of Germany in the
2005 German election, and the defeat of the British Labour Party in the 2010
British election, and the Spanish Socialist Workers' Party in the 2011 Spanish
election. However there have been major increases in support for social
democratic parties elsewhere. In North America there was a massive surge in
support for Canada's New Democratic Party in the 2011 Canadian election,
allowing the party for its first time to become the second largest political
party in the Canadian Parliament. The New Democratic Party is the second
strongest social democratic party of a sovereign state in North America. The
Institutional Revolutionary Party is one of two parties in Mexico affiliated
with the Socialist International (the Party of the Democratic Revolution is the
other), and has formed a government at the federal level in Mexico, unlike the
New Democratic Party, which has only formed a government in Canada at the
provincial level. Social democracy advocates the creation of legal reforms and
economic redistribution programs to eliminate economic class disparities
between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat. It advocates the development of an
economic democracy and the development of cooperative business organizations as
an alternative to private enterprise. One example of a modern social democratic
economic plan was the Meidner Plan in Sweden which was enacted in 1982 and
promoted a gradualist market socialist achievement of social ownership through
taxation on private enterprise and transferring of the money gained to
socially-owned investment funds that gradually will result in wage-earners
gaining a controlling share in their enterprises; although by the early 1990s
the Social Democrats had lost their enthusiasm for it. Practical modern social
democratic policies include the promotion of a welfare state, and the creation
of economic democracy as a means to secure workers' rights. The Frankfurt
Declaration of the Socialist International in 1951, attended by many social
democratic parties from across the world, committed adherents to oppose
Bolshevik communism—especially Stalinism, and to promote a gradual
transformation of capitalism into socialism. Many of the policies espoused by
social democrats in the first half of the 20th century have since been put into
practice by social democratic governments throughout the industrialized world.
Industries have been nationalized, public spending has seen a large long-term
rise, and the role of the state in providing free-to-user or subsidized health
care and education has increased greatly. Many of the reforms made by social
democrats in Europe, such as the establishment of national health care
services, have been embraced by liberals and conservatives, and there is no
support outside of a radical fringe for a return to 19th-century levels of
public spending and economic regulation. Even in the United States, where no
major social democratic party exists, there are regulatory programmes (such as
public health and environmental protection) and welfare programmes (such as
Medicare and Medicaid) which enjoy bipartisan support. In recent years, several
social democratic parties (in particular, the British Labour Party) have
embraced more centrist, Third Way policy positions, and thus supported both the
privatization of certain state-controlled industries and services and the
reduction of certain forms of regulation of the market. Since the 1980s, there
has been a perception that social democracy has been on the retreat in the
Western world, particularly in English-speaking countries, where social
democratic values are arguably not as firmly rooted in local law and culture as
elsewhere. Traditional social democrats argue that Third Way ideology has
caused the movement to become too centrist, and even that the movement may be
becoming centre-right. In general, apparent reversals in policy have
encountered significant opposition among party members and core voters; many of
the latter have claimed that their leaders have betrayed the principles of
social democracy. The development of Third Way social democracy has resulted in
the rise of democratic socialism as a distinct break away ideology from social
democracy. In many countries, social democrats continue to exist alongside
democratic socialists, who stand to the left of them on the political spectrum.
The two movements sometimes operate within the same political party, such as
the Brazilian Workers' Party and the Socialist Party of France. Supporters of
Third Way ideals argue that they merely represent a necessary or pragmatic
adaptation of social democracy to the realities of the modern world:
traditional social democracy thrived during the prevailing international
climate of the post-war Bretton Woods consensus, which collapsed in the 1970s.
In Britain, where the electorate rejected the Labour Party four times
consecutively between 1979 and 1997, Third Way politician Tony Blair and his
colleagues in the New Labour movement took the strategic decision to
disassociate themselves publicly from the previous, explicitly democratic
socialist incarnations of their party. The Labour Government that came to power
in 1997 continued the tradition that Margaret Thatcher started in the 1980s of
selling out nationalized industries, and the income gap between the rich and
the poor grew. This challenge to traditional social democratic ideals alienated
many backbenchers, including some who advocated a less militant ideology of
social democracy. The development of new social democratic policies in this
environment is the subject of wide-ranging debate within the left and centre-
left. A number of political think-tanks, such as Policy Network and Wiardi
Beckman Stichting, have been active in facilitating and promoting this debate.
Since the rise in popularity of the New Right and neoliberalism, a number of
prominent modern social democratic parties have abandoned the goal of the
gradual evolution of capitalism to socialism and instead support welfare state
capitalism. Political parties. Social democratic political parties, which
sometimes also include a democratic socialist element, operate in many
developed and developing countries, including France, Germany, the United
Kingdom, Spain, Australia, Israel and Brazil. Most European social democratic
parties are members of the Party of European Socialists, which is one of the
main political parties at the European level, and its parliamentary group the
Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats. Globally, most social
democratic parties worldwide are members of the Socialist International. In
many cases, social democratic parties are the dominant (India, Portugal,
Australia) or second-placed (Canada, Italy, Sweden, Germany, United Kingdom)
players within their respective political systems, though in some cases they
are minor parties in federal politics (Ireland, Russia). Since the 1960s, many
social democrats have broadened their objectives beyond the field of economic
policy to include aspects of environmentalism, feminism, racial equality and
multiculturalism. Another notable development is the tendency since the 1980s
for social democratic parties to distance themselves from distinctively left-
wing economic policies such as public ownership and dirigisme, adopting instead
policies that support a relatively lightly regulated economy and emphasize
equality of opportunity. This trend, known as the Third Way, is controversial
among some of the left, many of whom argue that Third Way politicians (such as
Tony Blair and Bill Clinton) have moved too far to the centre, or even the
centre-right. Others, such as the leadership of the UK Labour Party, reject
this critique. Criticism. Marxian socialists of the classical, orthodox and
analytical variations argue that because social democratic programs retain the
capitalist mode of production, they also retain the fundamental issues of
capitalism, including cyclical fluctuations, exploitation and alienation.
Social democratic programs intended to ameliorate capitalism, such as
unemployment benefits, taxation on profits and the wealthy, create
contradictions of their own by limiting the efficiency of the capitalist system
by reducing incentives for capitalists to invest in production. Democratic
socialists, such as David Schweickart, contrast social democracy with
democratic socialism by defining the former as an attempt to strengthen the
welfare state, and the latter as an alternative socialist economic system to
capitalism. According to Schweickart, the democratic socialist critique of
social democracy states that capitalism could never be sufficiently
"humanized", and any attempt to suppress the economic contradictions of
capitalism would only cause them to emerge elsewhere. For example, attempts to
reduce unemployment too much would result in inflation, and too much job
security would erode labor discipline. In contrast to social democracy,
democratic socialists advocate a post-capitalist economic system based either
on market socialism combined with workers self-management, or on some form of
participatory-economic planning. Market socialists contrast social democracy
with market socialism. While a common goal of both systems is to achieve
greater social and economic equality, market socialism does so by changes in
enterprise ownership and management, whereas social democracy attempts to do so
by government-imposed taxes and subsidies on privately-owned enterprises. Frank
Roosevelt and David Belkin criticize social democracy for maintaining a
property-owning capitalist class, which has an active interest in reversing
social democratic policies and a disproportionate amount of power over society
to influence governmental policy as a class. Another criticism of social
democracy has to do with its relationship to neoliberalism and labour unions.
It is argued in "Social Democracy: After the Cold War", that Evans, Bryan &
Schmidt, Ingo. 2012. "Social Democracy: After the Cold War." AU Press,
Athabasca University. pp. 184. Communists accuse social democracy of accepting
the values of capitalist society and therefore not being a genuine form of
socialism. Notable social democrats. Commission for Racial Equality: Clement
Attlee Lecture: Trevor Phillips's speech, 21 April 2005
