Social Credit Social credit is an economic philosophy developed by C. H.
Douglas (1879–1952), a British engineer, who wrote a book by that name in
1924. Social Credit is described by Douglas as "the policy of a philosophy"; he
called his philosophy "practical Christianity". This philosophy is
interdisciplinary in nature, encompassing the fields of economics, political
science, history, accounting and physics. Assuming the only safe place for
power is in many hands, social credit is a distributive philosophy, and its
policy is to disperse power to individuals. Social Credit philosophy is best
summed by Douglas when he said, "Systems were made for men, and not men for
systems, and the interest of man which is self-development, is above all
systems, whether theological, political or economic." Douglas said that Social
Crediters want to build a new civilization based upon absolute economic
security for the individual—where “...they shall sit every man under his
vine and under his fig tree; and none shall make them afraid.” In other
words, Douglas did not seek to build a utopia, but to set the conditions upon
which each individual can build their own utopia. It was while he was
reorganising the work at Farnborough during World War I that Douglas noticed
that the weekly total costs of goods produced was greater than the sums paid
out to individuals for wages, salaries and dividends. This seemed to contradict
the theory put forth by classic Ricardian economics, that all costs are
distributed simultaneously as purchasing power. Troubled by the seeming
disconnect between the way money flowed and the objectives of industry
("delivery of goods and services", in his view), Douglas set out to apply
engineering methods to the economic system. Douglas collected data from over a
hundred large British businesses and found that in every case, except that of
companies heading for bankruptcy, the sums paid out in salaries, wages and
dividends were always less than the total costs of goods and services produced
each week: consumers did not have enough income to buy back what they had made.
He published his observations and conclusions in an article in the "English
Review" where he suggested: "That we are living under a system of accountancy
which renders the delivery of the nation's goods and services to itself a
technical impossibility." He later formalized this observation in his A+B
theorem. The theorem divides a company's payments into two categories: A =
income, and B = payments to other organizations. Prices equal A+B, but income
only equals A in any cycle of production and consumption. Since income (A) is
always less than total prices (A+B), he believed the theorem demonstrated that
people's income is always insufficient to buy back all of production: the
consequence of which is ever increasing debt. Douglas proposed to eliminate
this gap between total prices and total incomes by augmenting consumers'
purchasing power through a National Dividend and a Compensated Price Mechanism.
According to Douglas, the true purpose of production is consumption, and
production must serve the genuine, freely expressed interests of consumers.
Each citizen is to have a beneficial, not direct, inheritance in the communal
capital conferred by complete and dynamic access to the fruits of industry
(consumer goods) assured by the National Dividend and Compensated Price.
Consumers, fully provided with adequate purchasing power, will establish the
policy of production through exercise of their monetary vote. In this view, the
term economic democracy does not mean worker control of industry, but
democratic control of credit. Removing the policy of production from banking
institutions, government, and industry, Social Credit envisages an "aristocracy
of producers, serving and accredited by a democracy of consumers." The policy
proposals of social credit attracted widespread interest in the decades between
the world wars of the twentieth century because of their relevance to economic
conditions of the time. Douglas called attention to the excess of production
capacity over consumer purchasing power, an observation that was also made by
John Maynard Keynes in his book, "The General Theory of Employment, Interest
and Money". While Douglas shared some of Keynes' criticisms of classical
economics, his unique remedies were disputed and even rejected by most
economists and bankers of the time. Remnants of Social Credit still exist
within social credit parties throughout the world, but not in the purest form
originally advanced by Major C. H. Douglas. Economic theory. Factors of
Production and Value. Douglas disagreed with classical economists who divided
the factors of production into only land, labour and capital. While Douglas did
not deny these factors in production, he believed the “cultural inheritance
of society” was the primary factor. Cultural inheritance is defined as the
knowledge, technique and processes that have been handed down to us
incrementally from the origins of civilization. Consequently, mankind does not
have to keep “reinventing the wheel”. “We are merely the administrators
of that cultural inheritance, and to that extent the cultural inheritance is
the property of all of us, without exception.” Adam Smith, David Ricardo and
Karl Marx claimed that labour creates all value. While Douglas did not deny
that all costs are ultimately due to labour charges of some sort (past or
present), he denied that the present labour of the world creates all wealth.
Douglas was careful to distinguish between value, costs and prices. He claimed
that one of the factors leading to a misdirection of thought in terms of the
nature and function of money was economists' obsession over values and their
relation to prices and incomes. While Douglas recognized "value in use" as a
legitimate theory of values, he also claimed that values were subjective and
not capable of being measured in an objective manner. Thus, he rejected the
idea that the role of money is to act as a standard, or measure, of value.
Douglas believed that the role of money is to act as a medium of communication
by which consumers direct the distribution of production. Economic Sabotage.
Closely associated with the concept of our cultural inheritance is the social
credit theory of economic sabotage. While Douglas believed the cultural
heritage factor of production is primary in increasing wealth, he also believed
that economic sabotage is the primary factor decreasing it. The word wealth
derives from the Old English word "wela", or "well-being", and Douglas believed
that all production should increase personal well-being. Therefore, production
that does not directly increase personal well-being is waste, or economic
sabotage.  By modern methods of accounting, the consumer is forced to pay for
all the costs of production, including waste. The economic effect of charging
the consumer with all waste in industry is that the consumer is forced to do
much more work than is necessary. Douglas believed that wasted effort could be
directly linked to confusion in regards to the purpose of the economic system,
and the belief that the economic system exists to provide employment in order
to distribute goods and services.  Purpose of an economy.  Douglas believed
that it was the third policy alternative upon which an economic system should
be based, but confusion of thought has allowed the industrial system to be
governed by the first two objectives. If the purpose of our economic system is
to deliver the maximum amount of goods and services with the least amount of
effort, then the ability to deliver goods and services with the least amount of
employment is actually desirable. Douglas proposed that unemployment is a
logical consequence of machines replacing labour in the productive process, and
any attempt to reverse this process through policies designed to attain full
employment directly sabotages our cultural inheritance. Douglas also believed
that the people displaced from the industrial system through the process of
mechanization should still have the ability to consume the fruits of the
system, because he suggested that we are all inheritors of the cultural
inheritance, and his proposal for a national dividend is directly related to
this belief. The creditary nature of money. Douglas criticized classical
economics because many of the theories are based upon a barter economy, whereas
the modern economy is a monetary one. Initially, money originated from the
productive system, when cattle owners punched leather discs which represented a
head of cattle. These discs could then be exchanged for corn, and the corn
producers could then exchange the disc for a head of cattle at a later date.
The word “pecuniary" comes from the Latin "pecunia", originally and literally
meaning "cattle" (related to "pecus", meaning "beast"). Today, the productive
system and the monetary system are two separate entities. Douglas demonstrated
that loans create deposits, and presented mathematical proof in his book
"Social Credit". Bank credit comprises the vast majority of money, and is
created every time a bank makes a loan. Douglas was also one of the first to
understand the creditary nature of money. The word credit derives from the
Latin "credere", meaning "to believe". "The essential quality of money,
therefore, is that a man shall believe that he can get what he wants by the aid
of it." According to economists, money is a medium of exchange. Douglas argued
that this may have once been the case when the majority of wealth was produced
by individuals who subsequently exchanged it with each other. But in modern
economies, division of labour splits production into multiple processes, and
wealth is produced by people working in association with each other. For
instance, an automobile worker does not produce any wealth (i.e., the
automobile) by himself, but only in conjunction with other auto workers, the
producers of roads, gasoline, insurance, etc. In this view, wealth is a pool
upon which people can draw, and money becomes a ticketing system. The
efficiency gained by individuals cooperating in the productive process was
coined by Douglas as the “unearned increment of association” – historic
accumulations of which constitute what Douglas called the cultural heritage.
The means of drawing upon this pool is money distributed by the banking system.
Douglas believed that money should not be regarded as a commodity but rather as
a ticket, a means of distribution of production. "There are two sides to this
question of a ticket representing something that we can call, if we like, a
value. There is the ticket itself – the money which forms the thing we call
'effective demand' – and there is something we call a price opposite to it."
Money is effective demand, and the means of reclaiming that money are prices
and taxes. As real capital replaces labour in the process of modernization,
money should become increasingly an instrument of distribution. The idea that
money is a medium of exchange is related to the belief that all wealth is
created by the current labour of the world, and Douglas clearly rejected this
belief, stating that the cultural inheritance of society is the primary factor
in the creation of wealth, which makes money a distribution mechanism, not a
medium of exchange. The former Douglas identified as being anti-social in
policy. The latter he claimed was equivalent to claiming ownership of the
nation. According to Douglas, money is merely an abstract representation of the
real credit of the community, which is the ability of the community to deliver
goods and services, when and where they are required. The A + B theorem. "It is
not the purpose of this short article to depreciate the services of
accountants; in fact, under the existing conditions probably no body of men has
done more to crystallise the data on which we carry on the business of the
world; but the utter confusion of thought which has undoubtedly arisen from the
calm assumption of the book-keeper and the accountant that he and he alone was
in a position to assign positive or negative values to the quantities
represented by his figures is one of the outstanding curiosities of the
industrial system; and the attempt to mould the activities of a great empire on
such a basis is surely the final condemnation of an out-worn method."  Beyond
empirical evidence, Douglas claims this deductive theorem demonstrates that
total prices rise faster than total incomes when regarded as a flow.
According to Douglas, the major consequence of the problem he identified in his
A+B theorem is exponentially increasing debt. Further, he believed that society
is forced to produce goods that consumers either do not want or cannot afford
to purchase. The latter represents a favorable balance of trade, meaning a
country exports more than it imports. But not every country can pursue this
objective at the same time, as one country must import more than it exports
when another country exports more than it imports. Douglas proposed that the
long-term consequence of this policy is a trade war, typically resulting in
real war – hence, the social credit admonition, “He who calls for Full-
Employment calls for War!”, expressed by the Social Credit Party of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, led by John Hargrave. The former represents
excessive capital production and/or military build-up. Military buildup
necessitates either the violent use of weapons or a superfluous accumulation of
them. Douglas believed that excessive capital production is only a temporary
correction, because the cost of the capital appears in the cost of consumer
goods, or taxes, which will further exacerbate future gaps between income and
prices.  The A+B Theorem and a Cost Accounting View of Inflation. "The factory
cost—not the selling price—of any article under our present industrial and
financial system is made up of three main divisions-direct labor cost, material
cost and overhead charges, the ratio of which varies widely, with the
"modernity" of the method of production. For instance, a sculptor producing a
work of art with the aid of simple tools and a block of marble has next to no
overhead charges, but a very low rate of production, while a modern screw-
making plant using automatic machines may have very high overhead charges and
very low direct labour cost, or high rates of production. Since increased
industrial output per individual depends mainly on tools and method, it may
almost be stated as a law that intensified production means a progressively
higher ratio of overhead charges to direct labour cost, and, apart from
artificial reasons, this is simply an indication of the extent to which
machinery replaces manual labour, as it should." If overhead charges are
constantly increasing relative to income, any attempt to stabilize or increase
income is met with rising prices. If income is constant or increasing, and
overhead charges are continuously increasing due to technological advancement,
then prices, which equal income plus overhead charges, must also increase.
Further, any attempt to stabilize or decrease prices must be met by falling
incomes according to this analysis. As the Phillips Curve demonstrates,
inflation and unemployment are trade-offs, unless prices are reduced from
monies derived from outside the productive system. According to Douglas's A+B
theorem, the systemic problem of rising prices, or inflation, is not "too much
money chasing too few goods", but is the increasing rate of overhead charges in
production due to the replacement of labour by capital in industry combined
with a policy of full employment. Douglas did not suggest that inflation cannot
be caused by too much money chasing too few consumer goods, but according to
his analysis this is not the only cause of inflation, and inflation is systemic
according to the rules of cost accountancy given overhead charges are
constantly increasing relative to income. In other words inflation can exist
even if consumers have insufficient purchasing power to buy back all of
production. Douglas claimed that there were two limits which governed prices, a
lower limit governed by the cost of production, and an upper limit governed by
what an article will fetch on the open market. Douglas suggested that this is
the reason why deflation is regarded as a problem in orthodox economics because
bankers and businessmen were very apt to forget the lower limit of prices.
Compensated Price and National Dividend. Douglas proposed to eliminate the gap
between purchasing power and prices by increasing consumer purchasing power
with credits which do not appear in prices in the form of a price rebate and a
dividend. Formally called a "Compensated Price" and a "National (or Consumer)
Dividend", a National Credit Office would be charged with the task of
calculating the size of the rebate and dividend by determining a national
balance sheet, and calculating aggregate production and consumption statistics.
The price rebate is based upon the observation that the real cost of production
is the mean rate of consumption over the mean rate of production for an
equivalent period of time. The physical cost of producing something is the
materials and capital that were consumed in its production, plus that amount of
consumer goods labour consumed during its production. This total consumption
represents the physical, or real, cost of production. Since fewer inputs are
consumed to produce a unit of output with every improvement in process, the
real cost of production falls over time. As a result, prices should also fall
with the progression of time. "As society's capacity to deliver goods and
services is increased by the use of plant and still more by scientific
progress, and decreased by the production, maintenance, or depreciation of it,
we can issue credit, in costs, at a greater rate than the rate at which we take
it back through prices of ultimate products, if capacity to supply individuals
exceeds desire.". Based on his conclusion that the real cost of production is
less than the financial cost of production, the Douglas price rebate
(Compensated Price) is determined by the ratio of consumption to production.
Since consumption over a period of time is typically less than production over
the same period of time in any industrial society, the real cost of goods
should be less than the financial cost. For example, if the money cost of a
good is $100, and the ratio of consumption to production is 3/4, then the real
cost of the good is $100(3/4)=$75. As a result, if a consumer spent $100 for a
good, the National Credit Authority would rebate the consumer $25. The good
costs the consumer $75, the retailer receives $100, and the consumer receives
the difference of $25 via new credits created by the National Credit Authority.
The National Dividend is justified by the displacement of labour in the
productive process due to technological increases in productivity. As human
labour is increasingly replaced by machines in the productive process, Douglas
believed people should be free to consume while enjoying increasing amounts of
leisure, and that the Dividend would provide this freedom. Critics of the A + B
theorem and rebuttal. Critics of the theorem, such as J.M. Pullen, Hawtrey and
J.M Keynes argue there is no difference between A and B payments. Other
critics, such as Gary North, argue that social credit policies are
inflationary. "The A + B theorem has met with almost universal rejection from
academic economists on the grounds that, although B payments may be made
initially to “other organizations,” they will not necessarily be lost to
the flow of available purchasing power. A and B payments overlap through time.
Even if the B payments are received and spent before the finished product is
available for purchase, current purchasing power will be boosted by B payments
received in the current production of goods that will be available for purchase
in the future." "Let A1+B1 be the costs in a period to time of articles
produced by factories making consumable goods divided up into A1 costs which
refer to money paid to individuals by means of salaries, wages, dividends,
etc., and B1 costs which refer to money paid to other institutions. Let A2, B2
be the corresponding costs of factories producing capital equipment. The money
distributed to individuals is A1+A2 and the cost of the final consumable goods
is A1+B1. If money in the hands of the public is to be equal to the costs of
consumable articles produced then A1+A2 = A1+B1 and therefore A2=B1. Now modern
science has brought us to the stage where machines are more and more taking the
place of human labour in producing goods, i.e. A1 is becoming less important
relatively to B1 and A2 less important relatively to B2. In symbols if B1/A1 =
k1 and B2/A2 = k2 both k1 and k2 are increasing. Since A2=B1 this means that
(A2+B2)/(A1+B1)= (1+k2)*A2/(1+1/k1)*B1 = (1+k2)/(1+1/k1) which is increasing.
Thus in order that the economic system should keep working it is essential that
capital goods should be produced in ever increasing quantity relatively to
consumable goods. As soon as the ratio of capital goods to consumable goods
slackens, costs exceed money distributed, i.e. the consumer is unable to
purchase the consumable goods coming on the market." And in a reply to Dr.
Hobson, Douglas restated his central thesis: "To reiterate categorically, the
theorem criticised by Mr. Hobson: the wages, salaries and dividends distributed
during a given period do not, and cannot, buy the production of that period;
that production can only be bought, i.e., distributed, under present conditions
by a draft, and an increasing draft, on the purchasing power distributed in
respect of future production, and this latter is mainly and increasingly
derived from financial credit created by the banks." Incomes are paid to
workers during a multi-stage program of production. According to the convention
of accepted orthodox rules of accountancy, those incomes are part of the
financial cost and price of the final product. For the product to be purchased
with incomes earned in respect of its manufacture, all of these incomes would
have to be saved until the product’s completion. Douglas argued that incomes
are typically spent on past production to meet the present needs of living, and
will not be available to purchase goods completed in the future—goods which
must include the sum of incomes paid out during their period of manufacture in
their price. Consequently, this does not liquidate the financial cost of
production inasmuch as it merely passes charges of one accountancy period on as
mounting charges against future periods. In other words, according to Douglas,
supply does not create enough demand to liquidate all the costs of production.
Douglas denied the validity of Say's Law in economics. “Thus the problem of
providing that new capital-investment shall always outrun capital-disinvestment
sufficiently to fill the gap between net income and consumption, presents a
problem which is increasingly difficult as capital increases. New capital-
investment can only take place in excess of current capital-disinvestment if
future expenditure on consumption is expected to increase. Each time we secure
to-day’s equilibrium by increased investment we are aggravating the
difficulty of securing equilibrium to-morrow.” The criticism that social
credit policies are inflationary is based upon what economists call the
quantity theory of money, which states that the quantity of money multiplied by
its velocity of circulation equals total purchasing power. Douglas was quite
critical of this theory stating, "The velocity of the circulation of money in
the ordinary sense of the phrase, is – if I may put it that way – a
complete myth. No additional purchasing power at all is created by the velocity
of the circulation of money. The rate of transfer from hand-to-hand, as you
might say, of goods is increased, of course, by the rate of spending, but no
more costs can be canceled by one unit of purchasing power than one unit of
cost. Every time a unit of purchasing power passes through the costing system
it creates a cost, and when it comes back again to the same costing system by
the buying and transfer of the unit of production to the consuming system it
may be cancelled, but that process is quite irrespective of what is called the
velocity of money, so the categorical answer is that I do not take any account
of the velocity of money in that sense." The Alberta Social Credit government
published in a committee report what was perceived as an error in regards to
this theory: “The fallacy in the theory lies in the incorrect assumption that
money 'circulates', whereas it is issued against production, and withdrawn as
purchasing power as the goods are bought for consumption." Other critics argue
that if the gap between income and prices exists as Douglas claimed, the
economy would have collapsed in short order. They also argue that there are
periods of time in which purchasing power is in excess of the price of consumer
goods for sale. "What people who say that forget is that we were piling up debt
at that time at the rate of ten millions sterling a day and if it can be shown,
and it can be shown, that we are increasing debt continuously by normal
operation of the banking system and the financial system at the present time,
then that is proof that we are not distributing purchasing power sufficient to
buy the goods for sale at that time; otherwise we should not be increasing
debt, and that is the situation." Political theory. C.H. Douglas defined
democracy as the “will of the people”, not rule by the majority, suggesting
that social credit could be implemented by any political party supported by
effective public demand. Once implemented to achieve a realistic integration of
means and ends, party politics would cease to exist. Traditional ballot box
democracy is incompatible with Social Credit, which assumes the right of
individuals to choose freely one thing at a time, and to contract out of
unsatisfactory associations. Douglas advocated what he called the
“responsible vote”, where anonymity in the voting process would no longer
exist. "The individual voter must be made individually responsible, not
collectively taxable, for his vote." Douglas believed that party politics
should be replaced by a "union of electors" in which the only role of an
elected official would be to implement the popular will. Douglas believed that
the implemenation of such a system was necessary as otherwise the government
would be the tool of international financiers. Douglas also opposed the secret
ballot arguing that it led to electoral irresponsibility, calling it a "Jewish"
technique used to ensure Barabbas was freed leaving Christ to be crucified.
Douglas considered the constitution an organism, not an organization. In this
view, establishing the supremacy of common law is essential to ensure
protection of individual rights from an all-powerful parliament. Douglas also
believed the effectiveness of British government is structurally determined by
application of a Christian concept known as Trinitarianism: "In some form or
other, sovereignty in the British Isles for the last two thousand years has
been Trinitarian. Whether we look on this Trinitarianism under the names of
King, Lords and Commons or as Policy, Sanctions and Administration, the
Trinity-in-Unity has existed, and our national success has been greatest when
the balance (never perfect) has been approached." Opposing the formation of
Social Credit parties, C.H. Douglas believed a group of elected amateurs should
never direct a group of competent experts in technical matters. While experts
are ultimately responsible for achieving results, the goal of politicians
should be to pressure those experts to deliver policy results desired by the
populace. According to Douglas, "the proper function of Parliament is to force
all activities of a public nature to be carried on so that the individuals who
comprise the public may derive the maximum benefit from them. Once the idea is
grasped, the criminal absurdity of the party system becomes evident." History.
C.H. Douglas was a civil engineer who pursued his higher education at Cambridge
University. His early writings appeared most notably in the British
intellectual journal "The New Age". The editor of that publication, Alfred
Orage, devoted "The New Age" and later "The New English Weekly" to the
promulgation of Douglas's ideas until his death on the eve of his BBC speech on
social credit, 5 November 1934, in the "Poverty in Plenty" Series. Douglas’s
first book, "Economic Democracy", was published in 1920, shortly after his
article "The Delusion of Super-Production" appeared in 1918 in the "English
Review". Among Douglas’s other early works were "The Control and Distribution
of Production", "Credit-Power and Democracy", "Warning Democracy" and "The
Monopoly of Credit". Of considerable interest is the evidence he presented to
the Canadian House of Commons Select Committee on Banking and Commerce in 1923,
to the British Parliamentary Macmillan Committee on Finance and Industry in
1930, which included exchanges with economist John Maynard Keynes, and to the
Agricultural Committee of the Alberta Legislature in 1934 during the term of
the United Farmers of Alberta Government in that Canadian province. The
writings of C.H. Douglas spawned a worldwide movement, most prominent in the
British Commonwealth, with beachheads in Europe and activities in the United
States where Orage, during his sojourn there, promoted Douglas’s ideas. In
the United States, the New Democracy group was headed by the American author
Gorham Munson who contributed a major book on social credit titled "Aladdin’s
Lamp: The Wealth of the American People". While Canada and New Zealand had
electoral successes with “social credit” political parties, the movement in
England and Australia was primarily devoted to pressuring existing parties to
implement social credit. This function was performed especially by Douglas’s
social credit secretariat in England and the Commonwealth Leagues of Rights in
Australia. Douglas continued writing and contributing to the secretariat’s
journals, initially social credit and shortly thereafter "the social crediter"
(which continues to be published by the Secretariat) for the remainder of his
lifetime, concentrating more on political and philosophical issues in his later
years. Political history. In early years of the movement, Labour Party
leadership resisted pressure from Trade unionists to implement social credit,
as hierarchical views of Fabian socialism, economic growth and full employment,
were incompatible with the National Dividend and abolishment of wage slavery
suggested by Douglas. In an effort to discredit the social credit movement, one
leading Fabian, Sidney Webb, is said to have declared that he didn’t care
whether Douglas was technically correct or not – they simply did not like his
policy. In 1935 the first “Social Credit” government was elected in
Alberta, Canada under the leadership of William Aberhart. A book by Maurice
Colbourne entitled "The Meaning of Social Credit" convinced Aberhart that the
theories of C.H. Douglas were essential for Alberta's recovery from the Great
Depression. Aberhart added a heavy dose of fundamentalist Christianity to
Douglas' theories; the Canadian social credit movement, which was largely
nurtured in Alberta, thus acquired a strong social conservative tint that it
retains to this day. Having counselled the previous United Farmers of Alberta
provincial government, Douglas became an advisor to Aberhart, but withdrew
shortly after due to strategic differences. Aberhart sought orthodox counsel
with respect to the Province's finances, and the strained correspondence
between them was published by Douglas in his book, "The Alberta Experiment".
"This seems to be a suitable occasion on which to emphasise the proposition
that a Balanced Budget is quite inconsistent with the use of Social Credit
(i.e., Real Credit – the ability to deliver goods and services 'as, when and
where required') in the modern world, and is simply a statement in accounting
figures that the progress of the country is stationary, i.e., that it consumes
exactly what it produces, including capital assets. The result of the
acceptance of this proposition is that all capital appreciation becomes quite
automatically the property of those who create and issue of money the banking
system and the necessary unbalancing of the Budget is covered by Debts."  Under
Ernest Manning, who succeeded Aberhart after his untimely death, the Alberta
Social Credit Party gradually departed from its origins and became popularly
identified as a right wing populist movement. In the Secretariat’s journal,
"An Act for the Better Management of the Credit of Alberta", Douglas published
a critical analysis of the Social Credit movement in Alberta, in which he said,
"The Manning administration is no more a Social Credit administration than the
British government is Labour". Manning accused Douglas and his followers of
anti-Semitism, and went about purging all of the so-called "Douglasites" from
the Party. The British Columbia Social Credit Party won power in 1952 in the
province to Alberta's west, but had little in common with Douglas or his
theories. Social credit parties also enjoyed some national electoral success in
Canada. The Social Credit Party of Canada was founded with support from Western
Canada, and eventually built another base of support in Quebec. Social Credit
also did well at the national level in New Zealand, where it was the country's
third party for almost 30 years. Philosophy. Douglas described Social Credit as
"the policy of a philosophy", and warned against viewing it solely as a scheme
for monetary reform. He coined this philosophy "practical Christianity" – the
central issue of which is the Incarnation. Douglas believed there was a Canon
which ran through the universe, and Jesus Christ was the Incarnation of this
Canon. However, he also believed Christianity remained ineffective so long as
it remained transcendental. Religion, which derives from the Latin word
"religare" (to “bind back”), was intended to be a binding back to reality.
Social Credit is concerned with the incarnation of Christian principles in our
organic affairs. Specifically, it is concerned with the principles of
association and how to maximize the increments of association which redound to
satisfaction of the individual in society – while minimizing any decrements
of association. The goal of Social Credit is to maximize immanent sovereignty.
Social credit is consonant with the Christian doctrine of salvation through
unearned grace, and is therefore incompatible with any variant of the doctrine
of salvation through works. Works need not be of Purity in intent or of
desirable consequence and in themselves alone are as "filthy rags". For
instance, the present system makes destructive, obscenely wasteful wars a
virtual certainty—which provides lots of "work" for everyone. Social credit
has been called the Third Alternative to the futile Left-Right Duality.
Although Douglas defined social credit as a philosophy with Christian roots, he
did not envision a Christian theocracy. Douglas did not believe that religion
should be thrust upon anyone through force of law or external compulsion.
Practical Christian society is Trinitarian in structure, based upon a
constitution where the constitution is an organism changing in relation to our
knowledge of the nature of the universe. "The progress of human society is best
measured by the extent of its creative ability. Imbued with a number of natural
gifts, notably reason, memory, understanding and free will, man has learned
gradually to master the secrets of nature, and to build for himself a world
wherein lie the potentialities of peace, security, liberty and abundance."
Douglas said that social crediters want to build a new civilization based upon
absolute economic security for the individual—where “...they shall sit
every man under his vine and under his fig tree; and none shall make them
afraid.” In keeping with this goal, Douglas was opposed to all forms of
taxation on real property. This set social credit at variance from the land-
taxing recommendations of Henry George. Social credit society recognizes the
fact that the relationship between man and God is unique. In this view, it is
essential to allow man the greatest possible freedom in order to pursue this
relationship. Douglas defined freedom as the ability to choose and refuse one
thing at a time, and to contract out of unsatisfactory associations. If people
are given the economic security and leisure achievable in the context of a
social credit dispensation, Douglas believed most would end their service to
mammon and use their free time pursuing spiritual, intellectual, or cultural
goals leading to self-development. Douglas opposed what he termed "the pyramid
of power". Totalitarianism reflects this pyramid and is the antithesis of
social credit. It turns the government into an end instead of a means, and the
individual into a means instead of an end – Demon est deus inversus —
“the devil is God upside down.” Social credit is designed to give the
individual the maximum freedom allowable given the need for association in
economic, political and social matters. Social Credit elevates the importance
of the individual and holds that all institutions exist to serve the individual
– that the State exists to serve its citizens, not that individuals exist to
serve the State. Douglas emphasized that all policy derives from its respective
philosophy and that “... Society is primarily metaphysical, and must have
regard to the organic relationships of its prototype.” Social credit rejects
dialectical materialistic philosophy. "The tendency to argue from the
particular to the general is a special case of the sequence from materialism to
collectivism. If the universe is reduced to molecules, ultimately we can
dispense with a catalogue and a dictionary; all things are the same thing, and
all words are just sounds – molecules in motion." Douglas divided philosophy
into two schools of thought that he labeled the "classical school" and the
"modern school", which are broadly represented by philosophies of Aristotle and
Francis Bacon respectively. Douglas was critical of both schools of thought,
but believed that "the truth lies in appreciation of the fact that neither
conception is useful without the other". Relationship to anti-Semitism. Social
crediters, and Douglas himself, have been criticized for spreading anti-
semitism. Douglas was critical of "international Jewry", especially in his
later writings. He asserted that some Jews controlled many of major banks and
were involved in an international conspiracy to centralize the power of
finance. Some people have claimed that Douglas was anti-Semitic because he was
quite critical of Jewish philosophy. In his book entitled "Social Credit", he
wrote that, “It is not too much to say that one of the root ideas through
which Christianity comes into conflict with the conceptions of the Old
Testament and the ideals of the pre-Christians era, is in respect of this
dethronement of abstractionism.” Douglas was opposed to abstractionist
philosophies, because he believed these philosophies inevitably led to the
elevation of abstractions, such as state, over individuals. He also believed
that what he called Jewish abstractionist thought tended to lead them to
communist ideals and the emphasis of the group over the individual. John L.
Finlay, in his book, "Social Credit: The English Origins", wrote, “Anti-
Semitism of the Douglas kind, if it can be called anti-Semitism at all, may be
fantastic, may be dangerous even, in that it may be twisted into a dreadful
form, but it is not itself vicious nor evil.” In her book, "Social Discredit:
Anti-Semitism, Social Credit and the Jewish Response", Janine Stingel claims,
“Douglas's economic and political doctrines were wholly dependent on an anti-
Semitic conspiracy theory." John L. Finlay disagrees with Stingel's assertion
and argues that, "It must also be noted that while Douglas was critical of some
aspects of Jewish thought, Douglas did not seek to discriminate against Jews as
a people or race. It was never suggested that the National Dividend be withheld
from them." Literary figures in Social Credit. As lack of finance has been a
constant impediment to the development of the arts and literature, the concept
of economic democracy through Social Credit had immediate appeal in literary
circles. Names associated with Social Credit include C.M. Grieve, Charlie
Chaplin, William Carlos Williams, Ezra Pound, T. S. Eliot, Herbert Read, Aldous
Huxley, Storm Jameson, Eimar O’Duffy, Sybil Thorndyke, Bonamy Dobrée, Eric
de Maré and the American publisher James Laughlin. Hilaire Belloc and GK
Chesterton espoused similar ideas. In 1933 Eimar O’Duffy published "Asses in
Clover", a science fiction fantasy exploration of Social Credit themes. His
Social Credit economics book "Life and Money: Being a Critical Examination of
the Principles and Practice of Orthodox Economics with A Practical Scheme to
End the Muddle it has made of our Civilisation", was endorsed by Douglas.
Robert A. Heinlein described a Social Credit economy in his posthumously-
published first novel, "", and his "Beyond This Horizon" describes a similar
system in less detail. In Heinlein's future society, government is not funded
by taxation. Instead, government controls the currency and prevents inflation
by providing a price rebate to participating business and a guaranteed income
to every citizen. In his novel "The Trick Top Hat", part of his "Schrödinger's
Cat Trilogy", Robert Anton Wilson described the implementation by the President
of an alternate future United States of an altered form of Social Credit, in
which the government issues a National Dividend to all citizens in the form of
"trade aids," which can be spent like money but which cannot be lent at
interest (in order to mollify the banking industry) and which eventually expire
(to prevent inflation and hoarding). More recently, Richard C. Cook, an analyst
for the U.S. Civil Service Commission, Food and Drug Administration, NASA, the
U.S. Treasury Department, and author of the books "Challenger Revealed" and "We
Hold These Truths", has written several articles relating to Social Credit and
monetary reform at Global Research, an independent research and media group of
writers, scholars, journalists and activists. Frances Hutchinson, Chairperson
of the Social Credit Secretariat, has co-authored, with Brian Burkitt, a book
entitled "The Political Economy of Social Credit and Guild Socialism".
