Socialism and LGBT rights The connection between left-leaning ideologies and
LGBT rights has a long and mixed history. Most socialists and members of other
left wing political ideologies have supported LGBT rights, while many Communist
or Hard-line Socialist regimes including the USSR, People's Republic of China,
North Korea, Cuba, and Zimbabwe, have opposed them. Recently some governments
headed by socialist-leaning parties have taken more positive attitudes towards
LGBT people, while other socialist/Marxist governments continue to suppress
their rights. LGBT individuals themselves hold a variety of viewpoints across
the political spectrum. History. The sexual politics of utopian socialism. The
first currents of modern socialist thought emerged in Europe in the early 19th
century. They are now often described with the phrase utopian socialism. Gender
and sexuality were significant concerns for many of the leading thinkers, such
as Charles Fourier and Henri de Saint-Simon in France and Robert Owen in
Britain, as well as their followers, many of whom were women. For Fourier, for
example, true freedom could only occur without masters, without the ethos of
work, and without suppressing passions; the suppression of passions is not only
destructive to the individual, but to society as a whole. Writing before the
advent of the term 'homosexuality', Fourier recognised that both men and women
have a wide range of sexual needs and preferences which may change throughout
their lives, including same-sex sexuality and "androgénité". He argued that
all sexual expressions should be enjoyed as long as people are not abused, and
that "affirming one's difference" can actually enhance social integration.
Marx, Engels, Ulrichs and Schweitzer. From the earliest European homosexual
rights movements, activists such as Karl-Heinrich Ulrichs and Magnus Hirschfeld
approached the Left for support. During the 1860s, Ulrichs wrote to Karl Marx
and sent him a number of books on Uranian (homosexual/transgender)
emancipation, and in 1869 Marx passed one of Ulrich's books on to Engels.
Engels responded with disgust to Marx in a private letter, lashing out at
"pederasts" who are "extremely against nature", and described Ulrichs' platform
of homosexual rights as "turning smut into theory". He worried that things
would go badly for heterosexuals like himself should homosexual rights be
gained. Known to both Ulrichs and Marx was the case of Jean Baptista von
Schweitzer, an important labor organiser who had been charged with attempting
to solicit a teenage boy in a park in 1862. Social democrat leader Ferdinand
Lassalle defended Schweitzer on the grounds that while he personally found
homosexuality to be dirty, the labor movement needed the leadership of
Schweitzer too much to abandon him, and that a person's sexual tastes had
"absolutely nothing to do with a man’s political character".See also:
*Footman, David, 1947. "Ferdinand Lassalle, Romantic Revolutionary" (New Haven,
Yale University Press, 1947; reprint, New York: Greenwood, 1969), p.
182.*Mayer, Gustav, 1909. "Johann Baptist von Schweitzer und die
Sozialdemokratie, ein Beitrag zur Geschichte der deutschen Arbeiterbewegung"
(Jena: Gustav Fisher, 1909). p 91 Marx, on the other hand, suggested that
Engels use this incident to smear Schweitzer: "You must arrange for a few jokes
about him to reach Siebel, for him to hawk around to the various papers."
However, Schweitzer would go on to become President of the German Labor Union,
and the first Social Democrat elected to a parliament in Europe. August Bebel's
"Woman under Socialism" (1879), the "single work dealing with sexuality most
widely read by rank-and-file members of the Social Democratic Party of Germany
(SPD)", was even more explicit in warning socialists of the dangers of same-sex
love. Bebel attributed "this crime against nature" in both men and women to
sexual indulgence and excess, describing it as an upper-class, metropolitan and
foreign vice. Although he did publicly support the efforts to legalize
homosexuality. The Magnus Hirschfeld circle. The leading figure of the LGBT
movement in Germany from the turn of the 19th to 20th century until the Nazi
government came to power in 1933 was undoubtedly Magnus Hirschfeld. Hirschfeld,
who was also a socialist and supporter of the Women's Movement, formed the
Scientific-Humanitarian Committee to campaign against German Penal Code Section
175 which outlawed male-male sex. Hirschfeld's organisation did a deal with the
SPD (of which Lassalle and Schweitzer had been members) to get them to put
forward a bill in the Reichstag in 1898, but it was opposed in the Reichstag
and failed to pass. Most of Hirschfeld's circle of homosexual activists had
socialist politics, including Kurt Hiller, Richard Linsert, Johanna
Elberskirchen and Bruno Vogel. Anarchism, libertarian socialism and LGBT
rights. Contemporaries of Marx and Engels, Michael Bakunin and Sergei Nechaev
were influential anarchists and, some believe, gay lovers. They didn't write
about sexual liberation or speak publicly of any romance, but their passionate
relationship is revealed in private letters. Bakunin wrote to Nechaev on June
2, 1870, after being betrayed by him: “I loved you deeply and still love you,
Nechaev... how deeply, how passionately, how tenderly I loved you and believed
in you!” In Oscar Wilde's "The Soul of Man Under Socialism", he passionately
advocates for an egalitarian society where wealth is shared by all, while
warning of the dangers of authoritarian socialism that would crush
individuality. He later commented, "I think I am rather more than a Socialist.
I am something of an Anarchist, I believe." Wilde's left libertarian politics
were shared by other figures who actively campaigned for homosexual
emancipation in the late 19th century, John Henry Mackay and Edward Carpenter.
Free love and anarchy. In Europe and North America, the free love movement
combined ideas revived from utopian socialism with anarchism and feminism to
attack the "hypocritical" sexual morality of the Victorian era, and the
institutions of marriage and the family that were seen to enslave women. Free
lovers advocated voluntary sexual unions with no state interference and
affirmed the right to sexual pleasure for both women and men, sometimes
explicitly supporting the rights of homosexuals and prostitutes. For a few
decades, adherence to "free love" became widespread among European and American
anarchists, but these views were opposed at the time by the dominant actors of
the Left: Marxists and social democrats. Radical feminist and socialist
Victoria Woodhull was expelled from the International Workingmen's Association
in 1871 for her involvement in the free love and associated movements. Indeed,
with Marx's support, the American branch of the organisation was purged of its
pacifist, anti-racist and feminist elements, which were accused of putting too
much emphasis on issues unrelated to class struggle and were therefore seen to
be incompatible with the "scientific socialism" of Marx and Engels. The
"Verband Fortschrittlicher Frauenvereine" (League of Progressive Women's
Associations), a turn of the 19th to 20th century left-wing organisation led by
Lily Braun campaigned for the decriminalisation of homosexuality in Germany and
aimed at organising prostitutes into labor unions. The broader labour movement
either attacked the League, saying they were utopians, or ignored it, and Braun
was driven out of the international Marxist movement. Helene Stöcker, another
German activist from the left wing of the women's movement, became heavily
involved in the sexual reform movement in 1919, after World War I, and served
on the board of the Institut für Sexualwissenschaft. She also campaigned to
protect single mothers and their children from economic and moral persecution.
Across the Atlantic, in New York's Greenwich Village, "bohemian" feminists and
socialists advocated self-realisation and pleasure for women (and also men) in
the here and now, as well as campaigning against the first World War and for
other anarchist and socialist causes. They encouraged playing with sexual roles
and sexuality, and the openly bisexual radical Edna St. Vincent Millay and the
lesbian anarchist Margaret Anderson were prominent among them. The Villagers
took their inspiration from the (mostly anarchist) immigrant female workers
from the period 1905-1915 and the "New Life Socialism" of Edward Carpenter,
Havelock Ellis and Olive Schreiner. Discussion groups organised by the
Villagers were frequented by the Russian anarchist Emma Goldman, among others.
Magnus Hirschfeld noted in 1923 that Goldman "has campaigned boldly and
steadfastly for individual rights, and especially for those deprived of their
rights. Thus it came about that she was the first and only woman, indeed the
first and only American, to take up the defense of homosexual love before the
general public." In fact, prior to Goldman, heterosexual anarchist Robert
Reitzel (1849–98) spoke positively of homosexuality from the beginning of the
1890s in his German-language journal "Der arme Teufel" (Detroit). During her
life, Goldman was lionized as a free-thinking "rebel woman" by admirers, and
derided by critics as an advocate of politically motivated murder and violent
revolution. Her writing and lectures spanned a wide variety of issues,
including prisons, atheism, freedom of speech, militarism, capitalism,
marriage, free love, and homosexuality. Although she distanced herself from
first-wave feminism and its efforts toward women's suffrage, she developed new
ways of incorporating gender politics into anarchism. After decades of
obscurity, Goldman's iconic status was revived in the 1970s, when feminist and
anarchist scholars rekindled popular interest in her life. European homosexual
anarchists. Anarchism's foregrounding of individual freedoms made for a natural
marriage with homosexuality in the eyes of many, both inside and outside of the
Anarchist movement. Emil Szittya, in "Das Kuriositäten-Kabinett" (1923), wrote
about homosexuality that "very many anarchists have this tendency. Thus I found
in Paris a Hungarian anarchist, Alexander Sommi, who founded a homosexual
anarchist group on the basis of this idea.” His view is confirmed by Magnus
Hirschfeld in his 1914 book "Die Homosexualität des Mannes und des Weibes":
“In the ranks of a relatively small party, the anarchist, it seemed to me as
if proportionately more homosexuals and effeminates are found than in
others.” Italian anarchist Luigi Bertoni (who Szittya also believed to be
homosexual) observed that “Anarchists demand freedom in everything, thus also
in sexuality. Homosexuality leads to a healthy sense of egoism, for which every
anarchist should strive.” Anarcho-syndicalist writer Ulrich Linse wrote about
"a sharply outlined figure of the Berlin individualist anarchist cultural scene
around 1900", the "precocious Johannes Holzmann" (known as Senna Hoy): "an
adherent of free love, celebrated homosexuality as a ‘champion of culture’
and engaged in the struggle against Paragraph 175.” The young Hoy (born 1882)
published these views in his weekly magazine, ("Kampf") from 1904 which reached
a circulation of 10,000 the following year. German anarchist psychotherapist
Otto Gross also wrote extensively about same-sex sexuality in both men and
women and argued against its discrimination. In the 1920s and 1930s, French
individualist anarchist publisher Emile Armand campaigned for acceptance of
free love, including homosexuality, in his journal "L’en dehors". The
individualist anarchist Adolf Brand was originally a member of Hirschfeld's
Scientific-Humanitarian committee, but formed a break-away group. Brand and his
colleagues, known as the Gemeinschaft der Eigenen, were heavily influenced by
homosexual anarchist John Henry Mackay. The group despised effeminacy and saw
homosexuality as an expression of manly virility available to all men,
espousing a form of nationalistic masculine "Lieblingminne" (chivalric love)
that would later be linked to the rise of Nazism. They were opposed to
Hirschfeld's medical characterisation of homosexuality as the domain of an
"intermediate sex". Brand "toyed with anti-Semitism", and disdained the Jewish
Hirschfeld. Ewald Tschek, another homosexual anarchist writer of the era,
regularly contributed to Adolf Brand's journal "Der Eigene", and wrote in 1925
that Hirschfeld’s Scientific Humanitarian Committee was a danger to the
German people, caricaturing Hirschfeld as "Dr. Feldhirsch". Anarchist
homophobia. Despite these supportive stances, the anarchist movement of the
time certainly wasn't free of homophobia: an editorial in an influential
Spanish anarchist journal from 1935 argued that an Anarchist shouldn't even
"associate" with homosexuals: "If you are an anarchist, that means that you are
more morally upright and physically strong than the average man. And he who
likes inverts is no real man, and is therefore no real anarchist." However,
despite this history, present-day anarchists widely accept homosexuality as
they are opposed to any form of social oppression and injustice. The homophile
movement. McCarthyism in the US believed a "homosexual underground" was
abetting the "communist conspiracy", which was sometimes called the Homintern.
A number of homosexual rights groups came into being during this period. These
groups, now known as the "homophile" movement, often had left-wing or socialist
politics, such as the communist Mattachine Society and the Dutch COC which
originated on the left. Harry Hay, who is seen by many as the father of the
modern gay rights movement in the United States, was originally a trade union
activist. In 1934, he organised an important 83-day-long workers' strike of the
port of San Francisco with his lover, actor Will Geer. He was an active member
of the Communist Party. Hay and the Mattachine Society were among the first to
argue that gay people were not just individuals but in fact represented a
"cultural minority". They even called for public marches of homosexuals,
predicting later gay pride parades. Hay's concept of the "cultural minority"
came directly from his Marxist studies, and the rhetoric that he and his
colleague Charles Rowland employed often reflected the militant Communist
tradition. The Communist Party did not officially allow gays to be members,
claiming that homosexuality was a 'deviation'; perhaps more important was the
fear that a member's (usually secret) homosexuality would leave them open to
blackmail and made them a security risk in an era of red-baiting. Concerned to
save the party difficulties, as he put more energy into the Mattachine Society,
Hay himself approached the CP's leaders and recommended his own expulsion.
However, after much soul-searching, the CP, clearly reeling at the loss of a
respected member and theoretician of 18 years' standing, refused to expel Hay
as a homosexual, instead expelling him under the more convenient ruse of
'security risk', while ostentatiously announcing him to be a 'Lifelong Friend
of the People'. The Mattachine Society was the second gay rights organization
that Hay established, the first being '"Bachelors for Wallace" (1948) in
support of Henry Wallace's progressive presidential candidacy. In 1951, the
Socialist Party USA was close to adopting a platform plank in favor of gay
rights, with one article in the Youth Socialist Party press supporting such a
move. Communist and Socialist Countries. After the October 1917 Russian
Revolution under the leadership of Lenin and Trotsky, the USSR abolished
previous laws against homosexuality. The lowest point in the history of the
relationship between socialism and homosexuality undoubtedly begins with the
rise of Joseph Stalin in the USSR, after Lenin's death, and continues through
the era of state communism in the USSR, East Germany, China and North Korea. In
all cases the conditions of sexual minorities, including transgender people,
worsened in communist states after the arrival of Stalin. Hundreds of thousands
of homosexuals were interned in gulags during the Great Purge, where many were
beaten to death. Some Western intellectuals withdrew their support of Communism
after seeing the severity of repression in the USSR, including the gay writer
André Gide. Historian Jennifer Evans reports that the East German government
"alternated between the view homosexual activity as a remnant of bourgeois
decadence, a sign of moral weakness, and a threat to social and political
health of the nation." These three characterizations imbued the policies and
practices of all communist states, as well as those Western socialist and
communist organizations who followed their example. Productivity and
consistency were paramount in communist states, and sexual minorities were seen
as unproductive and non-conformist. The Communists generally associated male
effeminacy with luxury, leisure, and bourgeois or upper class values.
Effeminate men and homosexuals were sometimes forced to participate in programs
of 'reeducation' involving forced labor, conversion therapy, psychotropic drugs
or confinement in psychiatric hospitals. The revolutionary Cuban gay writer
Reinaldo Arenas noted that, shortly after the communist government of Fidel
Castro came to power, "persecution began and concentration camps were opened
[...] the sexual act became taboo while the "new man" was proclaimed and
masculinity exalted." Similar "moral reforms" were instituted in the USSR,
Communist China and in East Germany, as part of building a solid foundation for
the new socialist republics. Following the 1953 uprising in East Germany, the
government defended the traditional family, while homosexuality was regarded as
contrary to "healthy habits of workers." This agenda was pursued using the
existing Article 175 of the penal code, which had been applied under the Nazis.
While there had been no law against sodomy in the USSR, such a law was
introduced in 1933, added to the penal code as Article 121, which condemned
homosexual relations with penalties of imprisonment up to five years. With the
fall of the Soviet regime and the repeal of the law against sex between
consenting adult men, prisoners convicted under that part of the law were
released very slowly. All communist states have banned gay and lesbian
associations, whether social or political, and have banned the publication of
LGBT material. Often, especially during the 1950s and 1960s, gays were
denounced, dismissed from their jobs, imprisoned, deported and, in some cases,
castrated or even executed. As was the case in many other parts of the world,
conditions improved dramatically towards the end of the last century. After
1968. During the emergence of the new social movements of the 1960s and 1970s,
the socialist left began to review its relationship to gender, sexuality and
identity politics. Emerging from a number of events, such as the May 1968
insurrection in France, the anti-Vietnam war movement in the US and the
Stonewall riots of 1969, militant Gay Liberation organisations began to spring
up around the world. Many saw their roots in left radicalism more than in the
established homophile groups of the time, such as British and American Gay
Liberation Front, the British Gay Left Collective, the Italian Fuori!, the
French FHAR, the German Rotzschwule, and the Dutch Red Faggots. The then styled
Gay Lib leaders and writers also came from a left-wing background, such as
Dennis Altman, Martin Duberman, Steven Ault, Brenda Howard, John D'Emilio,
David Fernbach (writing in the English language), Pierre Hahn and Guy
Hocquenghem (in French) and the Italian Mario Mieli. Some were inspired by
Herbert Marcuse's "Eros and Civilization", which attempts to synthesise the
ideas of Karl Marx and Sigmund Freud. 1960s and 1970s radical Angela Davis (who
officially came out as a lesbian in 1999) had studied under Marcuse and was
greatly influenced by him. Europe. In France, gay activist and political
theorist Guy Hocquenghem, like many others, developed a commitment to socialism
through participating in the May 1968 insurrection. A former member of the
French Communist Party, he later joined the Front Homosexuel d'Action
Révolutionnaire (FHAR), formed by radical lesbians who split from the
Mouvement Homophile de France in 1971, including the left ecofeminist
Françoise d'Eaubonne. That same year, the FHAR became the first homosexual
group to demonstrate publicly in France when they joined Paris’s annual May
Day march held by trade unions and left-wing parties. In the United Kingdom,
the 1980s saw increased opposition to LGBT rights from the right wing
Conservative government led by Margaret Thatcher, who introduced Section 28 in
1988 in order to prevent what they saw as the "promotion" of homosexuality as
an acceptable lifestyle in schools. However, the Conservatives' main
opposition, the Labour Party, did little to address the issue of LGBT rights,
ignoring calls from left-wingers such as Ken Livingstone, to do so. Meanwhile,
the popular right-wing press featured pejorative references to lesbians,
supposedly especially associated with the all-female anti-nuclear protest camp
at Greenham Common, and individuals such as Peter Tatchell, the Labour
candidate in the 1983 Bermondsey by-election. However, the growing
commercialisation of the western gay subculture in the late 20th and early 21st
centuries (the "pink pound") has come under heavy criticism from socialists,
for instance, Hannah Dee remarked that it had reached "the point that London
Pride - once a militant demonstration in commemoration of the Stonewall riots -
has become a corporate-sponsored event far removed from any challenge to the
ongoing injustices that we LGBT community face." At the same time, an alliance
between fundamentalist Muslims and the Socialist Workers Party led a leading
member Lindsey German to reject gay rights as a "shibboleth" that must
automatically be observed. North America. The American Revolutionary Communist
Party's policy that "struggle will be waged to eliminate and reform
homosexuals" wasn't abandoned until 2001. The RCP now strongly supports gay
liberation. Meanwhile, the large and influential American Socialist Workers
Party (SWP) in the US released a memo stating that gay oppression had less
"social weight" than black and women's struggles, and prohibited members from
being involved in gay political organisations. They also believed that too
close an association with gay liberation would give the SWP an "exotic image"
and alienate it from the masses. That position was abandoned long ago. As the
Gay Liberation movement began to gain ground, Socialist organisations' policies
evolved, and many groups actively campaigned for gay rights. Notable examples
are the feminist Freedom Socialist Party, the Party for Socialism and
Liberation, the International Socialist Organization and the Socialist Party
USA. The Socialist Party USA was the first American political party to nominate
an openly gay man for President, running David McReynolds in 1980.
