Soft paternalism The term libertarian paternalism was coined by behavioral
economist Richard Thaler and legal scholar Cass Sunstein in a 2003 article in
the "American Economic Review". The authors developed their ideas in a longer
article in the "University of Chicago Law Review" that same year. They propose
that libertarian paternalism is paternalism in the sense that “it tries to
influence choices in a way that will make choosers better off, as judged by
themselves" (p. 5). It is libertarian in the sense that it aims to ensure that
“people should be free to opt out of specified arrangements if they choose to
do so.” (p. 1161) The possibility to opt out is said to “preserve freedom
of choice” (p. 1182). Thaler and Sunstein published a book-length defense of
this political doctrine in 2008 (new edition 2009). Libertarian paternalism is
similar to "asymmetric paternalism", which refers to policies designed to help
people who behave irrationally and so are not advancing their own interests,
while interfering only minimally with people who behave rationally. Such
policies are also asymmetric in the sense that they should be acceptable both
to those who believe that people behave rationally and to those who believe
that people often behave irrationally. Examples of policies. Countries that
have an "opt-out" system for voluntary organ donation (anyone who did not
explicitly refuse to donate have their organs in case of accident is considered
a donor) experience dramatically higher levels of organ donation consent, than
countries with an opt-in system. Austria, with an opt-out system, has a consent
rate of 99.98%, while Germany, with a very similar culture and economic
situation, but an opt-in system, has a consent rate of only 12%. Cab drivers in
New York City have seen an increase in tips from 10% to 22% after passengers
had the ability to pay using credit cards on a device installed in the cab
whose screen presented them with three default tip options, ranging from 15% to
30%. Until recently, the default contribution rate for most tax-deferred
retirement savings plans in the United States was zero, and despite the
enormous tax advantages, many people took years to start contributing if they
ever did. Behavioral economists attribute this to the "status quo bias", the
common human resistance to changing one's behavior, combined with another
common problem: the tendency to procrastinate. Research by behavioral
economists demonstrated, moreover, that firms which raised the default rate
instantly and dramatically raised the contribution rates of their employees.
Raising default contribution rates is also an example of asymmetric
paternalism. Those who are making an informed deliberate choice to put aside
zero percent of their income in tax deferred savings still have this option,
but those who were not saving simply out of inertia or due to procrastination
are helped by higher default contribution rates. It is also asymmetric in the
second sense: If you do not believe that defaults matter, because you believe
that people will make rational decisions about something as important as
retirement saving, then you should not care about the default rate. If you
believe that defaults matter, on the other hand, you should want to set
defaults at the level that you believe will be best for the largest number of
people. Criticism of the choice of term. There has been much critique of the
term "libertarian paternalism". For example, it fails to appreciate the
traditional libertarian concern with coercion in particular, rather than with
freedom of choice in a wider sense. It also aims to promote wellbeing, when
there may be more libertarian aims that could be promoted, such as maximizing
future liberty.
