Somaly Mam Foundation The Somaly Mam Foundation is a registered 501(c)(3)
nonprofit organization focused on combating the global sex slave trade through
supporting the rescue, rehabilitation, and reintegration of the victims and
through raising global awareness on the issue. The foundation funds more than
10 organizations in various parts of the world that are combating sexual
slavery and human trafficking in the field. These include groups that are
rescuing girls from brothels, offering them shelter and safety, providing them
with basic education, and helping them reintegrate into new communities when
their healing processes are complete. Somaly Mam. Somaly Mam was born in the
Mondulkiri province of Cambodia. Orphaned at a young age, Somaly does not know
who her real parents are, nor does she know her real name or exact birth date.
Although she did not receive formal schooling, she was later trained to be a
midwife after the genocidal regime. However, Somaly was sold many times by a
man she called "grandfather" as a slave and coerced into prostitution. She was
forced to work in a brothel with many other young girls that were treated
horrifically through torture, manipulation, and scare tactics. One night she
watched a close friend murdered by a pimp. Her past is a major contributing
factor regarding her passion and effort to help young children and women
involved with human trafficking. Mam later returned to Cambodia to bring back
some of her experience and ideas to her homeland. She began establishing a non-
governmental organization in French called “Agir Pour les Femmes en Situation
Précaire (AFESIP),” translated in English “Acting for Women in Distressing
Circumstances.” She became co-founder of AFESIP and President of AFESIP
Cambodia in Phnom Penh. This organization’s main cause is the rescue,
rehabilitation, and reintegration of girls forced into prostitution. Programs.
The Somaly Mam Foundation is dedicated to ending sex slavery around the world
with a results-oriented, three-step approach to critical program areas: victim
services, survivor empowerment, and the eradication of slavery. The common
thread woven through all of the Foundation's programs is the collective voice
of survivors. The vision is modeled after Somaly’s inspiring life, ensuring
that survivors take charge in reclaiming their lives, fight back against their
former oppressors, and refuse to turn their backs on those who remain behind.
Victim services. The Somaly Mam Foundation supports the entire process of
healing a survivor from rescue and recovery to rehabilitation and
reintegration. The Foundation supports over ten shelters in four countries,
providing resources and funding to victim services providers. These
organizations provide survivors of human trafficking with food, shelter, and
medical and psychological care. These partners include AFESIP Cambodia, AFESIP
Laos, Alliance Anti-Trafic in Vietnam, and My Sister's Place. Survivor
empowerment. Once basic needs have been met, SMF supports education and
vocational training programs to prepare survivors for reintegration to
mainstream society. Survivors are given access to primary and secondary
education, and beyond if they wish to do so. These skills are invaluable for
survivors to flourish and sustain lives of dignity. Helping survivors of sex
slavery become self-sufficient emotionally and financially translates to
sustainable employment and alternative long-term solutions to reduce the risk
of being re-trafficked or returning to the sex industry. While survivors have
experienced significant trauma, they are often able to thrive with the proper
support. Young women have opened businesses, hold steady employment, and have
even gotten married. In Cambodia, teams visit reintegrated survivors to check
in and make sure that all is well with them in their new empowered lives.
Eradication of slavery. The Somaly Mam Foundation is dedicated to eradicating
slavery and the root causes that allow this evil to persist. Rule of law is
crucial to the fight against human trafficking. The Foundation is dedicated to
supporting and promoting rule of law in regions where the concept is threatened
or non-existent. SMF has developed a powerful network of domestic and
international partners, such as Lexis Nexis and The Body Shop, to apply
pressure to the Cambodian government and justice system to combat corruption
and complicity on the part of public officials. SMF works with local groups to
demand legislation that effectively addresses the issue and to allocate more
resources toward enforcement of these laws. The goal is to make engaging in
this crime more difficult and costly, as the likelihood of being apprehended
and prosecuted will increase. While initial efforts are focused in Cambodia,
advocacy campaigns will gradually expand to other countries as well. Awareness
and advocacy are crucial across the globe as well. By increasing knowledge of
trafficking, by understanding its root causes, and by creating an environment
where the world says "no more," the end of trafficking can come about in the
foreseeable future. Voices for Change. Survivors of trafficking are not weak
and helpless. They are strong, resilient, and have demonstrated incredible
courage in overcoming their tortured past and building a promising future for
themselves. The Somaly Mam Foundation is there to lend a hand and provide them
with a platform from which their voices can be heard around the world. Voices
for Change is that platform. Co-directed by Sina Vann, a survivor of sex
slavery in Cambodia, and modeled after Mam’s life example, VFC is designed to
give survivors an opportunity to help themselves by helping others, to have
their voices heard in the courts of law and public perception, and to have
influence and impact on effectuating change. From those who have struggled
through the pain of slavery, a new generation of leaders who stand for justice
and free will will arise. Those who have undergone rescue, recovery, education,
and reintegration are survivors who can choose to join the Voices for Change
initiative and help in the survivor services program area by speaking to new
victims brought to the centers, completing intake forms, teaching classes, and
sharing life skills training. Program participants join legal training seminars
and courageously share their stories with magistrates, judges, and other
members of the legal community brought together to better understand sex
slavery. The survivors’ first-hand accounts of the horrors of life as a slave
in the sex trade serve as dramatic wake-up calls to those in the legal
profession who have pledged themselves to the cause of justice. Participating
survivors host public service announcements in Cambodia and Southeast Asia.
They also accompany Mam to certain fundraising and awareness events to share
their experiences, educate the public, and show that this is happening to real
people — not just nameless, faceless masses. Each one of these women has
lived through horrific conditions and has emerged as a young leader. PROJECT
FUTURES global. PROJECT FUTURES global is the volunteer and activist platform
of the Somaly Mam Foundation. This program empowers volunteers to take action
and join the fight against slavery by using their skills and interests, their
communities, and their social networks to speak out, increase awareness, and
raise funds for the Somaly Mam Foundation. PROJECT FUTURES global supports and
assists volunteers with activities such as online campaigns and media stunts,
grassroots events, film nights, runs and walks, campus outreach, workplace
presentations, and more. PROJECT FUTURES global mobilizes volunteers and
activists all over the world, empowering a generation to shape their world into
one where women and children are safe from slavery. Origins of the Somaly Mam
Foundation. In 2007, Jared Greenberg and Nicholas Lumpp, two graduates of the
United States Air Force Academy, learned of a growing international crisis —
human trafficking. The sex slave trade had developed into the third most
profitable criminal industry, behind only narcotics and weapons. Governments
had yet to effectively handle the problem, and funding for organizations
fighting the illegal trade was minimal. Disturbed by the public's lack of
awareness of these ongoing atrocities, Greenberg and Lumpp decided it was time
to take action and help put an end to sexual slavery, once and for all. But
with an industry that generates $12 billion a year, enslaves millions of young
women and children, and is protected by corrupt government and law enforcement
officials, they had their work cut out for them. A few months later Greenberg
and Lumpp viewed an online video clip of Anderson Cooper 360 and saw a show
spotlighting a woman by the name of Somaly Mam. Sold into slavery at the age of
12, she later escaped and made it her mission to rescue, rehabilitate, and
reintegrate survivors of this heinous crime. The result was AFESIP, an
organization that has transformed the lives of thousands of victims of the
illegal trade since its inception in 1996. Mam is now regarded as one of the
most prolific activists fighting sexual slavery. Greenberg and Lumpp traveled
to Cambodia into the center of the sex slave industry. They met with Somaly
Mam, toured shelters, and met some of the young women who had been rescued. The
experience changed their lives. They realized that too many people around the
world do not know that slavery still exists. Increasing awareness and funding
organizations like AFESIP seemed paramount to combating the illegal trade.
During a car ride from Phnom Penh to Siem Reap, Mam explained her vision for a
U.S. based organization that would take her life's passion to the next level.
Thus, the Somaly Mam Foundation was born.
