Western Asia Western Asia, West Asia, Southwest Asia or Southwestern Asia are
terms that describe the westernmost portion of Asia. The terms are partly with
the "Middle East", which, however, also includes all of part of North Africa
and describes a geographical position in relation to Western Europe rather than
its location within the continent. Due to this perceived Eurocentrism,
international organizations such as the United Nations, have replaced such
terms as the "Middle East" and "Near East" with "Western Asia". This region and
Europe are collectively referred to as "Western Eurasia". History. The world's
earliest civilizations developed in Western Asia. For most of the last three
millennia, the region has been united under one or two powerful states; each
one succeeding the last, and at times, eastern and western based polities. The
main states in this regard were the Assyrian Empire, the Babylonian Empire, the
Achaemenid Empire, the Seleucid Empire, the Parthian Empire, the Roman Empire,
the Sassanid Empire, the Byzantine Empire, the Umayyad Caliphate, the Abbasid
Caliphate, the Safavid Empire, and the Ottoman Empire. Western Asia is the
birthplace of Islam, Christianity, Judaism, and other monotheistic religions.
Geography. Western Asia is located directly south of Eastern Europe. The region
is surrounded by seven major seas; the Aegean Sea, the Black Sea, the Caspian
Sea, the Persian Gulf, the Arabian Sea, the Red Sea, and the Mediterranean Sea.
To the north, the region is delimited from Europe by the Caucasus Mountains, to
the southwest, it is delimited from Africa by the Isthmus of Suez, while to the
east, the region adjoins Central Asia and South Asia. The Dasht-e Kavir and
Dasht-e Lut deserts in eastern Iran somewhat naturally delimit the region from
Asia itself. Climate. Western Asia is primarily arid and semi-arid, and can be
subject to drought, but it also contains vast expanses of forest and fertile
valleys. The region consists of grasslands, rangelands, deserts, and mountains.
Water shortages are a problem in many parts of West Asia, with rapidly growing
populations increasing demands for water, while salinization and pollution
threaten water supplies. Major rivers, including the Tigris and Euphrates,
provide sources for irrigation water to support agriculture. There are two wind
phenomena in Western Asia: the "sharqi" and the "shamal". The "sharqi" (or
"sharki") is a wind that comes from the south and southeast. It is seasonal,
lasting from April to early June, and comes again between late September and
November. The winds are dry and dusty, with occasional gusts up to 80
kilometers per hour (50 miles per hour) and often kick up violent sand and dust
storms that can carry sand a few thousand meters high, and can close down
airports for short periods of time. These winds can last for a full day at the
beginning and end of the season, and for several days during the middle of the
season. The "shamal" is a summer northwesterly wind blowing over Iraq and the
Persian Gulf states (including Saudi Arabia and Kuwait), often strong during
the day, but decreasing at night. This weather effect occurs anywhere from once
to several times a year. Topography. Western Asia contains large areas of
mountainous terrain. The Anatolian Plateau is sandwiched between the Pontus
Mountains and Taurus Mountains in Turkey. Mount Ararat in Turkey rises to 5,137
meters. The Zagros Mountains are located in Iran, in areas along its border
with Iraq. The Central Plateau of Iran is divided into two drainage basins. The
northern basin is Dasht-e Kavir (Great Salt Desert), and Dasht-e-Lut is the
southern basin. In Yemen, elevations exceed 3,700 meters in many areas, and
highland areas extend north along the Red Sea coast and north into Lebanon. A
fault-zone also exists along the Red Sea, with continental rifting creating
trough-like topography with areas located well-below sea level. The Dead Sea,
located on the border between the West Bank, Israel, and Jordan, is situated at
418Â m (1371Â ft) below sea level, making it the lowest point on the surface of
the Earth. Rub' al Khali, one of the world's largest sand deserts, spans the
southern third of the Arabian Peninsula in Saudi Arabia, parts of Oman, the
United Arab Emirates and Yemen. Jebel al Akhdar is a small range of mountains
located in northeastern Oman, bordering the Gulf of Oman. Geology. Plate
tectonics. Three major tectonic plates converge on Western Asia, including the
African, Eurasian, and Arabian plates. The boundaries between the tectonic
plates make up the Azores-Gibraltar Ridge, extending across North Africa, the
Red Sea, and into Iran. The Arabian Plate is moving northward into the
Anatolian plate (Turkey) at the East Anatolian Fault, and the boundary between
the Aegean and Anatolian plate in eastern Turkey is also seismically active.
Water resources. Several major aquifers provide water to large portions of
Western Asia. In Saudi Arabia, two large aquifers of Palaeozoic and Triassic
origins are located beneath the Jabal Tuwayq mountains and areas west to the
Red Sea. Cretaceous and Eocene-origin aquifers are located beneath large
portions of central and eastern Saudi Arabia, including Wasia and Biyadh which
contain amounts of both fresh water and saline water. Flood or furrow
irrigation, as well as sprinkler methods, are extensively used for irrigation,
covering nearly 90,000Â kmÂ² across Western Asia for agriculture. Demographics.
The population of Western Asia is over 300 million. The most populous countries
in the region are Iran and Turkey, each with around 75 million people, followed
by Iraq with around 32 million people. The major languages are Arabic, which is
an official language in 14 regional countries, followed by Turkish, and
Persian. Islam is the major faith in Western Asia. Economy. The economy of
Western Asia is diverse and the region experiences high economic growth. Turkey
has the largest economy in the region, followed by Saudi Arabia and Iran.
Petroleum is the major industry in the regional economy, as more than half of
the world's oil reserves and around 40 percent of the world's natural gas
reserves are located in the region. Current definitions. United Nations
Statistics Division. Though not included in the UN subregion of Western Asia,
Iran is commonly included within Western Asia. Afghanistan is also sometimes
included in a broader definition of "Western Asia", although Afghanistan is
more commonly included in Central Asia, or South Asia. The Sinai Peninsula of
Egypt geographically belongs to West Asia. Government of Canada. The Canadian
government uses "West Asian" in its statistics.
