Southern Agrarians The Southern Agrarians (also known as the Twelve
Southerners, the Vanderbilt Agrarians, the Nashville Agrarians, the Tennessee
Agrarians, or the Fugitive Agrarians) were a group of twelve American writers,
poets, essayists, and novelists, all with roots in the South, who joined
together to write a pro-Southern agrarian manifesto, a collection of essays
published in 1930 entitled "I'll Take My Stand: The South and the Agrarian
Tradition". They were major contributors to the revival of Southern literature
in the 1920s and 1930s now known as the Southern Renaissance. The Southern
Agrarians were based at Vanderbilt University in Nashville and leaders included
Allen Tate, John Crowe Ransom, Robert Penn Warren, John Gould Fletcher, Andrew
Nelson Lytle, and Donald Davidson. Background and general ideas of the Southern
Agrarians. The Agrarians evolved from a philosophical discussion group known as
the "Fugitives" or "Fugitive Poets". Many of the Southern Agrarians and
Fugitive poets were connected to Vanderbilt University, either as students or
as faculty members. Davidson, Lytle, Ransom, Tate, and Warren all attended the
university; Davidson and Ransom later joined the faculty, along with Wade and
Owsley. They were moved to respond by their studies of poetic modernism and by
H. L. Mencken's scathing critique of Southern culture. They were offended not
so much by Mencken's widely publicized essay "The Sahara of the Bozart", with
which they tended to agree, but by his subsequent bitter attacks on aspects of
Southern culture that they valued, such as its agrarianism, conservatism, and
religiosity. They sought to confront the widespread and rapidly increasing
effects of modernity, urbanism, and industrialism on American (but especially
Southern) culture and tradition. The informal leader of the Fugitives and the
Agrarians was John Crowe Ransom, but in a 1945 essay he announced that he no
longer believed in either the possibility or the desirability of an Agrarian
restoration, which he declared a "fantasy". The most eloquent exponent of the
Agrarian philosophy eventually proved to be Ransom's student Richard M. Weaver,
a friend of Donald Davidson. Unlike the others, Weaver taught at a Northern
institution, the University of Chicago. Other writers associated with the
Agrarians include Caroline Gordon, Brainard Cheney and Herbert Agar. The
Southern Agrarians bemoaned the increasing loss of Southern identity and
culture to industrialization. They believed that the traditional agrarian roots
of the United States, which dated back to the nation's founding in the 18th
century (with many of America's most important Founding Fathers being farmers),
were important to its nature. Their manifesto was a critique of the rapid
industrialization and urbanization during the first few decades of the 20th
century in the southern United States and elsewhere. It posited an alternative
based on a return to the more traditionally rural and local/regional culture,
and agrarian American values. The group opposed the rapid and destabilizing
changes in the U.S. that were leading it to become more urban, national/
international, and industrial. Because the book was published at the opening
(1930) of what would eventually become the Great Depression, some viewed it as
particularly prescient. The book's stance was anti-communist. Seward Collins,
editor of "The American Review", praised Benito Mussolini and Adolf Hitler for
thwarting a communist revolution in Germany. He published some essays by
Agrarians in 1933. In 1936, Allen Tate published a critique of fascism in "The
New Republic" to distance the Agrarians from Collins. Robert Penn Warren
emerged as the most accomplished of the Agrarians. He became a major American
poet and novelist, winning the Pulitzer Prize for his 1946 "All the King's
Men". Under attack as reactionary. "I'll Take My Stand" was attacked at the
time, and since, as a reactionary and romanticized defense of the Old South and
the Lost Cause of the Confederacy. It ignored slavery and denounced "progress",
for example, and some critics considered it to be moved by nostalgia. In the
1930s, the Agrarians were challenged by the modernizing social scientists (the
"Chapel Hill Sociologists") based at the University of North Carolina (in
Chapel Hill), and led by Howard W. Odum, on issues of urbanism, social
progress, and the very nature and definition of the South. The sociologists
produced Rupert Vance's "The Human Geography of the South" (1932), and Odum's
"Southern Regions of the United States" (1936), as well as numerous articles in
the journal "Social Forces." The sociologists argued that the problems in the
South stemmed from traditionalism which ought to and could be cured by
modernization, the opposite of the Agrarian viewpoint. Revival. At a reunion of
the Fugitive Poets in 1956, Warren confessed that for about a decade — from
just before World War II to some years after — he had shut Agrarianism from
his mind as irrelevant to the cataclysmic social and political events then
playing out in the world. Now, however, he believed that, rather than being
irrelevant, his old Agrarian enthusiasms were tied into the major problems of
the age. In the modern world, the individual had been marginalized, stripped of
any sense of responsibility, or of past or place. "In this context," writes
Paul V. Murphy, "the Agrarian image of a better antebellum South came to
represent for Warren a potential source of spiritual revitalization. The past
recalled, not as a mythical 'golden age' but 'imaginatively conceived and
historically conceived in the strictest readings of the researchers', could be
a 'rebuke to the present'." It was Warren's concern with democracy,
regionalism, personal liberty and individual responsibility that led him to
support the civil rights movement, which he depicted in his nonfiction works
"Segregation" (1956) and "Who Speaks for the Negro?" (1965) as a struggle for
identity and individualism. As Hugh Ruppersburg, among others, has argued,
Warren's support for the civil rights movement paradoxically stemmed from
Agrarianism, which by the 1950s meant something very different to him from the
Agrarianism of "I'll Take My Stand". As Warren's political and social views
evolved, his notion of Agrarianism evolved with them. He came to support more
progressive ideas and racial integration, and was a close friend of the eminent
African-American author Ralph Ellison. While Donald Davidson took a leading
role in the attempt to preserve the system of segregation, Warren took his
stand against it. As Paul V. Murphy writes, "Loyalty to the southern past and
the ambiguous lessons of Agrarianism led both men in very different
directions." Conservatives. In recent decades some traditionalistic
conservatives such as Allan C. Carlson, Joseph Scotchie, and Eugene Genovese
have praised the Agrarian themes in light of what they see as the failures of
highly urbanized and industrialized modern societies. Today, the Southern
Agrarians are lauded regularly in the conservative media such as the "Southern
Partisan". Some of their social, economic, and political ideas have been
refined and updated by writers such as Allan C. Carlson and Wendell Berry. The
Intercollegiate Studies Institute has published books which further explore the
ideas of the Agrarians.
