Soviet democracy Soviet democracy (sometimes council democracy) is a form of
democracy in which workers' councils called "soviets" (Russian for "council"),
consisting of worker-elected delegates, form organs of power possessing both
legislative and executive power. The soviets begin at the local level and onto
a national parliament-like assembly. According to Vladimir Lenin and other
ideologists of the Soviet Union, the soviets represent the democratic will of
the working class and are thus the embodiment of the dictatorship of the
proletariat. Critics of Lenin's rule and Soviet democracy such as the Council
communists claim that workers' councils/soviets were subverted and not truly
sovereign in the Soviet Union. Trotskyists agree that this was the case after
Joseph Stalin's takeover, but not completely so during Lenin's time. Maoists
and Hoxhaists argue that flaws in the system under Lenin and Joseph Stalin were
due to a lack of the party's faith in the masses and that this resulted in the
party disconnecting itself to the needs of the people, which was then exploited
by Marxist revisionists who turned the Soviet Union away from Marxism-Leninism
after Lenin's death. Concept. The process begins when the workers of a city
elect their local soviet. This body holds both legislative and executive power
for that city. The idea is identical to the Paris Commune. The local soviets
choose their delegates for their district soviet. These district soviets in
turn elect their provincial soviet. Lastly, the provincial soviets then choose
their delegates for the regional soviet. Each soviet has legislative-executive
power over the territory it governs. This elective process of a group of
soviets electing the council above it continues until the national soviet,
which is the supreme governing body of the nation. Until 1936 the national
soviet (at that time - Congress of Soviets) was not elected by the regional
soviets, but rather by the district soviets. Each district soviet will elect
and send a number of delegates to the national soviet that is appropriate to
accurately represent its population. But following passage of the 1936 Soviet
Constitution the Supreme Soviets became directly-elective as well. Each large
soviet (including some larger locals) elects a small executive committee. This
assembly deals with the day-to-day affairs of the territory that its soviet
governs. The executive committee is subservient to its soviet, its actions must
be in accordance with the soviet's legislation, and it only operates during
times when the soviet is not in session. This method is likely borrowed from
Athenian democracy. Proponents argue that this form of government is a method
through which the dictatorship of the proletariat can be exercised in large
populations. Soviet democracy is democracy by proxy. The theory being that
members of the soviets, being close to those workers or lower soviet members
that they represent, can thereby accurately translate the people's decisions
into legislation, and be more responsive than a centralized parliamentary
democracy. Ultimately soviet democracy is based on direct democracy, especially
with its advocy of recallable delegates. History in the Soviet Union. The first
soviets, also called workers' councils, were formed after the Russian
Revolution of 1905. Lenin and the Bolsheviks saw the soviet as the basic
organizing unit of society in a communist system and supported this form of
democracy. The soviets also played a considerable role in the February and
October Revolutions. At that time, they represented a variety of socialist
parties in addition to Bolsheviks. In post-revolutionary Russia local workers'
soviets would elect representatives that go on to form regional soviets, which
in turn elect representatives that form higher soviets, and so on up to the
Congress of Soviets. Later the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union would become
the highest legislative body of the entire country. After Lenin's party, the
Bolsheviks, only a got a minority of the votes in the election to the Russian
Constituent Assembly, he illegally disbanded it by force after its first
meeting, arguing, like Karl Marx, that parliamentary democracy could not fairly
represent the workers since it was in practice dominated by the bourgeoisie,
that the proportional representation did not take into account the SR split,
and that the Soviets (where the Bolsheviks "did" get a majority) more
accurately represented the opinion of the people, which had changed as shown in
the elections to the Soviets between the time of the elections to the Assembly
and the first meeting of the Assembly. He also explicitly stated that democracy
did not include those considered bourgeois. Critics argued that the elections
to the Soviets were not free and fair, unlike the elections to the Assembly.
After the revolution, the Bolsheviks had to defend the newly formed government
in World War I and the Russian Civil War. Many of the effects of the wars on
the new Soviet government may be part of what led to the decline of soviet
democracy in Russia (due to the authority the state took on in war time) and to
the emergence of the bureaucratic structure that maintained much control
throughout the history of the Soviet Union. However, one key blow against
soviet democracy occurred when other revolutionary socialist soviets other than
Bolshevik soviets were disbanded in a series of coups d'état because workers
returned non-Bolshevik majorities as early as March 1918. Lenin argued that the
Soviets and the principle of democratic centralism within the Bolshevik party
still assured democracy. However, Lenin also issued a "temporary" ban on
factions in the Russian Communist Party. This ban remained until the
revolutions of 1989 and according to critics made the democratic procedures
within the party an empty formality. When Stalin came to power he consolidated
much more authority under the party. Soviets were transformed into the
bureaucratic structure that existed for the rest of the history of the Soviet
Union and were completely under the control of party officials and the
politburo. Elections in the USSR. In theory, citizens selected the candidates
for election to local soviets. In practice, at least before the June 1987
elections, these candidates had been selected by the local Communist party,
Komsomol, and trade union officials under the direction of the district (raion)
party organization. Voting took place after six weeks of campaigning. Though
voters formally had the right to vote for or against the unopposed candidate,
until 1987 all candidates usually received about 99 percent of the vote.
Despite the party's historic control over local elections, from the nomination
of candidates to their unopposed elections, the citizens used the elections to
make public their concerns. They sometimes used the furnished paper ballots to
write requests for particular public services. For example, the 1985 elections
to an Omsk soviet included instructions to move the airfield farther from the
city center, construct a new music center, and build parking facilities for
invalids. Subsequently, the Omsk soviet took steps to provide these services,
all of which had the approval of the relevant party authorities. The Soviet
Communist Party as the vanguard party. As he surveyed the European milieu in
the late 1890s, Lenin found several problems with the Marxism of his day.
Contrary to what Marx had predicted, capitalism had strengthened itself over
the last third of the 19th century. The working class in western Europe had not
become impoverished; rather, its prosperity had risen. Hence, the workers and
their unions, although continuing to press for better wages and working
conditions, failed to develop the revolutionary class consciousness that Marx
had expected. Lenin also argued that the division of labor in capitalist
society prevented the emergence of proletarian class consciousness. Lenin wrote
that because workers had to labor ten or twelve hours each workday in a
factory, they had no time to learn the complexities of Marxist theory. Based on
his observations, Lenin shifted the engine of proletarian revolution from the
working class to a tightly knit party of intellectuals. Lenin wrote in "What is
to be Done" (1902) that the "history of all countries bears out the fact that
through their own powers alone, the working class can develop only a trade-
union consciousness." That is, history had demonstrated that the working class
could engage in local, spontaneous rebellions to improve its position within
the capitalist system but that it lacked the understanding of its interests
necessary to overthrow that system. Pessimistic about the proletariat's ability
to acquire class consciousness, Lenin argued that the bearers of this
consciousness were déclassé intellectuals who made it their vocation to
conspire against the capitalist system and prepare for the dictatorship of the
proletariat. Lenin also held that because Marx's thought was set forth in a
sophisticated body of philosophical, economic, and social analysis, a high
level of intellectual training was required to comprehend it. Hence, for Lenin,
those who would bring about the revolution must devote all their energies and
resources to understanding the range of Marx's thought. They must be
professional activists having no other duties that might interfere with their
efforts to promote revolution. The Communist Party of the Soviet Union
continued to regard itself as the institutionalization of Marxist-Leninist
consciousness in the Soviet Union, and therein lay the justification for the
controls it exercised over Soviet society. Article 6 of the 1977 Soviet
Constitution referred to the party as the "leading and guiding force of Soviet
society and the nucleus of its political system, of all state organizations and
public organizations." The party, precisely because it was the bearer of
Marxist-Leninist ideology, determined the general development of society,
directed domestic and foreign policy, and "imparts a planned, systematic, and
theoretically substantiated character" to the struggle of the Soviet people for
the victory of communism. Nomenklatura. The nomenklatura referred to the
Communist party's authority to make appointments to key positions throughout
the governmental system, as well as throughout the party's own hierarchy.
Coextensive with the nomenklatura were patron-client relations. Officials who
had the authority to appoint individuals to certain positions cultivated
loyalties among those whom they appointed. The patron (the official making the
appointment) promoted the interests of clients in return for their support.
Powerful patrons, such as the members of the Politburo, had many clients.
Moreover, an official could be both a client (in relation to a higher-level
patron) and a patron (to other, lower-level officials). Because a client was
beholden to his patron for his position, the client was eager to please his
patron by carrying out his policies. The Soviet power structure essentially
consisted of groups of vassals (clients) who had an overlord (the patron). The
higher the patron, the more clients the patron had. Patrons protected their
clients and tried to promote their careers. In return for the patron's efforts
to promote their careers, the clients remained loyal to their patron. Thus, by
promoting his clients' careers, the patron could advance his own power. Milovan
Djilas wrote of the nomenklatura in his book "The New class", and that it was
widely seen (and resented) by ordinary citizens as a bureaucratic élite that
enjoyed special privileges and had simply supplanted the earlier wealthy
capitalist élites. Constitutions which implemented soviets. The 1918
Constitution. The first constitution, the 1918 Soviet Constitution, described
the regime that assumed power in the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917. This
constitution gave broad guarantees of equal rights to workers and peasants. It
denied, however, the right of social groups that opposed the new government or
supported the White armies in the Civil War (1918–21) to participate in
elections to the soviets or to hold political power. Supreme power rested with
the All-Russian Congress of Soviets, made up of deputies from local soviets
across Russia. The steering committee of the Congress of Soviets—known as the
Central Executive Committee of the Congress of Soviets—acted as the "supreme
organ of power" between sessions of the congress and as the collective
presidency of the state. The congress recognized the Council of People's
Commissars ("Sovet narodnykh kommissarov", or Sovnarkom) as the administrative
arm of the young government. The Sovnarkom had exercised governmental authority
from November 1917 until the adoption of the 1918 constitution. The
constitution made the Sovnarkom responsible to the Congress of Soviets for the
"general administration of the affairs of the state." The constitution enabled
the Sovnarkom to issue decrees carrying the full force of law when the congress
was not in session. The congress then routinely approved these decrees at its
next session. The 1924 Constitution. The 1924 Soviet Constitution legitimated
the December 1922 union of the Russian SFSR, the Ukrainian SSR, the
Byelorussian SSR, and the Transcaucasian SFSR to form the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics. This constitution also altered the structure of the
central government. The constitution divided the Central Executive Committee
into the Soviet of the Union, which would represent the constituent republics,
and the Soviet of Nationalities, which would represent the interests of
nationality groups. The Presidium of the Central Executive Committee served as
the collective presidency. Between sessions of the Central Executive Committee,
the Presidium supervised the government administration. The Central Executive
Committee also elected the Sovnarkom, which served as the executive arm of the
government. The 1936 Constitution. The 1936 Soviet Constitution, adopted on
December 5, 1936, and also known as the "Stalin Constitution," redesigned the
government. The constitution repealed restrictions on voting and added
universal direct suffrage and the right to work to rights guaranteed by the
previous constitution. The constitution also provided for the direct election
of all government bodies and their reorganization into a single, uniform
system. The 1936 constitution changed the name of the Central Executive
Committee to the Supreme Soviet of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
Like its predecessor, the Supreme Soviet contained two chambers: the Soviet of
the Union and the Soviet of Nationalities. The constitution empowered the
Supreme Soviet to elect commissions, which performed most of the Supreme
Soviet's work. As under the former constitution, the Presidium exercised the
full powers of the Supreme Soviet between sessions and had the right to
interpret laws. The chairman of the Presidium became the titular head of state.
The Sovnarkom (after 1946 known as the Council of Ministers) continued to act
as the executive arm of the government. The 1977 Constitution. Like the 1936
constitution, the 1977 Soviet Constitution used direct election of all
government bodies and used the name "Soviet" for certain of these bodies.
