Soviet (council) Soviet (, , ) was a name used for several Russian political
organizations. Examples include the Czar's Council of Ministers, which was
called the “Soviet of Ministers”; a workers' local council in late Imperial
Russia; and the Supreme Soviet, the bicameral parliament of the Soviet Union.
Etymology. “Soviet” is derived from a Russian word signifying council,
assembly, advice, harmony, concord. The word “sovietnik” means councillor.
Imperial Russia. In Imperial Russia, the State Council was referred to as a
“Soviet of Ministers.” According to the official historiography of the
Soviet Union, a soviet was organized in May 1905 in Ivanovo during the 1905
Russian Revolution. In his memoirs, Volin claims that he witnessed the creation
of the St Petersburg Soviet in January 1905. The Russian workers were largely
organized at the turn of the 20th century, leading to a government-sponsored
Union leadership. In 1905, the Russo-Japanese War increased the strain on
Russian industrial production, the workers began to strike and rebel. They
represented an autonomous workers movement, one that broke free from the
government's oversight of workers unions. Soviets sprang up throughout the
industrial centers of Russia, usually organized on the factory level. The
soviets disappeared after the Revolution of 1905, but re-emerged under
Socialist leadership during the Revolution of 1917. Russian Revolution of 1917.
The popular organizations which came into existence during the Russian
Revolution of 1917 were called “Councils of Workmen's and Soldiers'
Deputies.” These bodies were supposed to be holding things together under the
provisional government until the election of a constituent assembly could take
place; in a sense, they were vigilance committees designed to guard against
counter-revolution. The Petrograd Soviet of 4,000 members was the most
important of these, on account of its position in the capital and its influence
over the garrison. At the beginning of the Revolution of 1917, these soviets
were under control of the Socialist-Revolutionaries, and even the Mensheviks
had a larger share of the elected representatives than the Bolsheviks. But as
World War I continued and the Russians met defeat after defeat, and the
provisional government proved inadequate at establishing industrial peace, the
Bolsheviks began to grow in support. By degrees, the Bolsheviks dominated with
a leadership which demanded “all power to the soviets.” The Bolsheviks
promised the workers a government run by workers' councils to overthrow the
bourgeoisie's main government body - the Provisional Government. In October
1917, the Bolsheviks overthrew the provisional government, giving all power to
the Soviets and the Bolsheviks who governed in their name. The Bolsheviks and
their allies came out with a program called “soviet government.” The soviet
system was described as “a higher type of state” and “a higher form of
democracy” which would “arouse the masses of the exploited toilers to the
task of making new history.” Furthermore, it offered “to the oppressed
toiling masses the opportunity to participate actively in the free construction
of a new society”. According to Lenin, the author of these quotations, soviet
rule “is nothing else than the organized form of the dictatorship of the
proletariat.” A code of rules governing elections to the soviets was framed,
but the following classes were disqualified to vote: “Those who employ others
for profit; those who live on incomes not derived from their own work —
interest on capital, industrial enterprises or landed property; private
business men, agents, middlemen; monks and priests of all denominations; ex-
employees of the old police services and members of the Romanov dynasty;
lunatics and criminals.” With village and factory soviets as a base, there
arose a vast pyramid of district, cantonal, county and regional soviets, each
with its executive soviet. Over and above these stood the “All-Russian Soviet
Congress,” which appointed an “All-Russian Central Executive Committee”
of not more than 200 members, which in turn chooses the “Soviet of People's
Commissaries” — the Ministry. Beginning with a minimum of three and maximum
of 50 members for smaller communities, the maximum for town soviets was fixed
at 1,000 members. The soviet system was seen as an alternative to parliamentary
systems for administering republican governments. Soviet Union. Originally, the
soviets were a grassroots effort to practice direct democracy. Russian Marxists
made them a medium for organizing against the state, and between the February
and October Revolutions, the Petrograd Soviet was a powerful force. The slogan
"All power to the soviets!" ("Vsya vlast sovyetam!"; "Вся власть
советам!") was used by the Bolsheviks to oppose the Provisional
Government led by Kerensky. Based on the Bolshevik's view of the state, the
word "soviet" extended its meaning to any supreme body that obtained the
authority of a group of soviets. In this sense, soviets turned into a
hierarchical structure - Communist government bodies at local level and
republic level were called "soviets", and at the top of the hierarchy, the
Congress of Soviets was the nominal core of the Union government of the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR), officially formed in December 1922.
However, the Communist Party officially played the "leading role" in society by
that time; the soviets were in practice subordinate to it. Later, in the USSR,
local governmental bodies were named "soviet" ("sovet": "council") with the
adjective indicating of the administrative level, customarily abbreviated :
gorsovet ("gorodskoy sovet": city council), raysovet/raisovet ("rayonny sovet":
raion council), selsovet ("sel'sky sovet": rural council), possovet ("poselkovy
sovet": settlement council). Outside Russia. The term soon came to be used
outside the former Russian Empire following 1917. The Limerick Soviet was
formed in Ireland 1919. A soviet republic was established in Bavaria on 7 April
1919. In 1920, the "Workers' Dreadnought" published “A Constitution for
British Soviets” in preparation for the launch of the Communist Party
(British Section of the Third International). Here the focus was on
“household” soviets “n order that mothers and those who are organisers of
the family life of the community may be adequately represented.”
