Space policy Space policy is the political decision-making process for, and the
application of, public policy regarding space exploration. It includes policy
regarding a country's civilian space program, as well as its policy on both
military use and commercial use of outer space. Space policy intersects with
science policy, since national space programs often perform or fund research in
space science, and also with defense policy, for applications such as spy
satellites and anti-satellite weapons. It also encompasses government
regulation of third-party activities such as commercial communications
satellites and private spaceflight. Space policy also encompasses the creation
and application of space law, and space advocacy organizations exist to support
the cause of space exploration. Space law. Space law is an area of the law that
encompasses national and international law governing activities in outer space.
There are currently five treaties that make up the body of international space
law. The inception of the field of space law began with the launch of the
world's first artificial satellite by the Soviet Union in October 1957. Named
"Sputnik 1", the satellite was launched as part of the International
Geophysical Year. Since that time, space law has evolved and assumed more
importance as mankind has increasingly come to use and rely on space-based
resources. Space policy by country. China. The Chinese space program consists
of the China National Space Administration and the China Aerospace Science and
Technology Corporation, a state-owned company which is the main contractor for
the Chinese space program. The China National Space Administration states that
it aims are maintaining the country's overall development strategy, making
innovations in an independent and self-reliant manner, promoting the country's
science and technology sector and encouraging economic and social development,
and actively engaging in international cooperation. Europe. The European Space
Agency (ESA) is the common space agency for many European nations. It is
independent of the European Union, though the 2007 European Space Policy
provides a framework for coordination between the two organizations and member
states, including issues such as security and defence, access to space, space
science, and space exploration. The ESA was founded to serve as a counterweight
to the dominant United States and Soviet space programs, and further the
economic and military independence of Europe. This has included the development
of the Ariane rockets, which by 1985 had captured over 40 percent of commercial
launch market in the free world. The ESA budget is split between mandatory and
voluntary programs, the latter of which allow individual member nations to
pursue their own national space goals within the organization. The ESA Director
General’s Proposal for the European Space Policy states, "Space systems are
strategic assets demonstrating independence and the readiness to assume global
responsibilities. Initially developed as defence or scientific projects, they
now also provide commercial infrastructures on which important sectors of the
economy depend and which are relevant in the daily life of citizens... Europe
needs an effective space policy to enable it to exert global leadership in
selected policy areas in accordance with European interests and values."
Russia. The space program of Russia was inherited from its predecessor state,
the Soviet Union. Russia's civilian space agency is the Russian Federal Space
Agency, and its military counterpart is the Russian Space Forces. In the 1980s
the Soviet Union was considered to be technologically behind the United States,
but it outspent the United States in its space budget, and its cosmonauts had
spent three times as many days in space as American astronauts. The Soviet
Union had also been more willing than the United States to embark on long-term
programs, such as the Salyut and Mir space station programs, and increased
their investment in space programs throughout the 1970s and 1980s. After the
dissolution of the Soviet Union, the 1990s saw serious financial problems
because of the decreased cash flow, which encouraged Roskosmos to improvise and
seek other ways to keep space programs running. This resulted in Roskosmos'
leading role in commercial satellite launches and space tourism. While
scientific missions, such as interplanetary probes or astronomy missions during
these years played a very small role, Roskosmos managed to operate the space
station Mir well past its planned lifespan, contribute to the International
Space Station, and continue to fly additional Soyuz and Progress missions. The
Russian economy boomed throughout 2005 from high prices for exports, such as
oil and gas, the outlook for subsequent funding became more favorable. The
federal space budget for the year 2009 was left unchanged despite the global
economic crisis, standing at about 82 billion rubles ($2.4 billion). Current
priorities of the Russian space program include the new Angara rocket family
and development of new communications, navigation and remote Earth sensing
spacecraft. The GLONASS global navigation satellite system has for many years
been one of the top priorities and has been given its own budget line in the
federal space budget. United States. The current space policy of the United
States was developed by the Barack Obama administration and released on 28 June
2010. It replaced the earlier Vision for Space Exploration, which was the space
policy under the George W. Bush administration. In the United States, space
policy is made by the President of the United States and the United States
Congress through the legislative process. The space policy of the United States
is carried out by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA),
which is the civilian and scientific space program of the United States, and by
various agencies of the Department of Defense, which include efforts regarding
communications, reconnaissance, intelligence, mapping, and missile defense. In
addition, the Department of Commerce's National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration operates various services with space components, such as the
Landsat program. The early history of United States space policy is linked to
the US–Soviet Space Race of the 1960s. The National Aeronautics and Space Act
creating the NASA was passed in 1958, after the launch of the Soviet Sputnik 1
satellite, and in response to the flight of Yuri Gagarin as the first man in
space, Kennedy in 1961 committed the United States to landing a man on the moon
by the end of the decade. Although the costs of the Vietnam War and the
programs of the Great Society forced cuts to NASA's budget as early as 1965,
the first moon landing occurred in 1969, early in Richard Nixon's presidency.
Under the Nixon administration NASA's budget continued to decline and three of
the planned Apollo moon landings were cancelled. The Nixon administration
approved the beginning of the Space Shuttle program in 1972, but did not
support funding of other projects such as a Mars landing, colonization of the
Moon, or a permanent space station. The Space Shuttle first launched in 1981,
during Ronald Reagan's administration. Reagan in 1982 announced a renewed
active space effort, which included initiatives such the construction of Space
Station Freedom, and the military Strategic Defense Initiative, and, later in
his term, a 30 percent increase in NASA's budget. The Space Shuttle Challenger
disaster in January 1986 led to a reevaluation of the future of the national
space program in the National Commission on Space report and the Ride Report.
The United States has participated in the International Space Station beginning
in the 1990s, the Space Shuttle program has continued, although the Space
Shuttle Columbia disaster has led to the planned retirement of the Space
Shuttle in mid-2011. There is a current debate on the post-Space Shuttle future
of the civilian space program: the Constellation program of the George W. Bush
administration directed NASA to create a set of new spacecraft with the goal of
sending astronauts to the Moon and Mars, but the Obama administration cancelled
the Constellation program, opting instead to emphasize development of
commercial rocket systems.
