Spanish Constitution of 1812 The Spanish Constitution of 1812 was established
on 19 March 1812 by the Cádiz Cortes, that was the first national legislative
assembly (Cortes Generales "General Courts") of Spain, while in refuge from the
Peninsular War. This constitution, one of the most liberal of its time, was
effectively Spain's first (see "Constitutions of Spain"), given that the
Bayonne Statute issued in 1808 under Joseph Bonaparte never went into effect.
It established the principles of universal male suffrage, national sovereignty,
constitutional monarchy and freedom of the press, and supported land reform and
free enterprise. Six weeks after Ferdinand VII's return to Spain on 24 March
1814, he abolished the constitution and had all monuments to it torn down,
except the one in Saint Augustine, Florida, which still stands. The
constitution was reinstated during the "Trienio Liberal" of 1820–1823, and
again briefly in 1836 and 1837 while the Progressives prepared the Constitution
of 1837. From 1812 to 1814, the Constitution was never really fully in effect:
much of Spain was ruled by the French, while the rest was in the hands of
interim junta governments focused on resistance to the Bonapartes rather than
on the immediate establishment of a constitutional regime. In the overseas
territories many did not recognize the legitimacy of the interim metropolitan
governments, leading to a power vacuum and the establishment of separate juntas
in these areas. The Spaniards nicknamed the Constitution "La Pepa" because it
was adopted on Saint Joseph's Day. Background. At the time the Cortes drafted
and adopted the Constitution, it was taking refuge from the French on Spain's
Atlantic coast, first in Isla de León (now San Fernando) and then in Cádiz.
From a Spanish point of view, the Peninsular War was a war of independence
against the French Empire and the king installed by the French, Joseph
Bonaparte. In 1808, both King Ferdinand VII and his predecessor and father,
Charles IV, had resigned their claims to the throne in favor of Napoleon
Bonaparte, who in turn passed the crown to his brother Joseph. While many in
elite circles in Madrid were willing to accept Joseph's rule, the Spanish
people were not. That war began on the night of 2 May, immortalized by
Francisco Goya's painting "The Charge of the Mamelukes". Napoleon's forces
faced both Spanish partisans and the British under the Arthur Wellesley. The
Spanish partisans organized an interim Spanish government, the Supreme Central
Junta and called for a Cortes to convene with representatives from all the
Spanish provinces throughout the worldwide empire, in order to establish a
government with a firm claim to legitimacy. The Junta first met on 25 September
1808 in Aranjuez and later in Seville, before being cornered in Cádiz. The
Supreme Central Junta, originally under the leadership of the elderly Count of
Floridablanca, initially tried to consolidate southern and eastern Spain to
maintain continuity for a restoration of the Bourbons. However, almost from the
outset they were in physical retreat from Napoleon's forces, and the
comparative liberalism offered by the Napoleonic regime made Floridablanca's
enlightened absolutism a likely basis to rally the country. In any event,
Floridablanca's strength failed him and he died on 30 December 1808. When the
Cortes convened in Cádiz in 1810, there appeared to be two possibilities for
Spain's political future if the French could be driven out. The first,
represented especially by Gaspar Melchor de Jovellanos, was the restoration of
the absolutist "Antiguo Régimen" ("Old Regime"); the second was to adopt some
sort of written constitution. Deliberations and reforms. Retreating before the
advancing French and an outbreak of yellow fever, the Supreme Central Junta
moved to Isla de León, where it was protected by the British Royal Navy, and
abolished itself, leaving a regency to rule until the Cortes could convene. The
origins of the Cortes did not harbor any revolutionary intentions, since the
Junta saw itself simply as a continuation of the legitimate government of
Spain. The opening session of the new Cortes was held on 24 September 1810 in
the building now known as the Real Teatro de las Cortes. The opening ceremonies
included a civic procession, a mass, and a call by the president of the
Regency, Pedro Quevedo y Quintana, the bishop of Ourense, for those present to
fulfill their task loyally and efficiently. Still, the very act of resistance
to the French involved a certain degree of deviation from the doctrine of royal
sovereignty: if sovereignty resided entirely in the monarch, then Charles and
Ferdinand's abdications in favor of Napoleon would have made Joseph Bonaparte
the legitimate ruler of Spain. The representatives who gathered at Cádiz were
far more liberal than the elite of Spain taken as a whole, and they produced a
document far more liberal than might have been produced in Spain were it not
for the war. Few of the most conservative voices were at Cádiz, and there was
no effective communication with King Ferdinand, who was a virtual prisoner in
France. In the Cortes of 1810-1812, liberal deputies, who had the implicit
support of the British who were protecting the city, were in the majority and
representatives of the Church and nobility constituted a minority. Liberals
wanted equality before the law, a centralized government, an efficient modern
civil service, a reform of the tax system, the replacement of feudal privileges
by freedom of contract, and the recognition of the property owner's right to
use his property as he saw fit. Three basic principles were soon ratified by
the Cortes: that sovereignty resides in the nation, the legitimacy of Ferdinand
VII as king of Spain, and the inviolability of the deputies. With this, the
first steps towards a political revolution were taken, since prior to the
Napoleonic intervention, Spain had been ruled as an absolute monarchy by the
Bourbons and their Habsburg predecessors. Although the Cortes was not unanimous
in its liberalism, the new Constitution reduced the power of the crown, the
Catholic Church (although Catholicism remained the state religion), and the
nobility. The Cortes of Cádiz worked feverishly and the first written Spanish
constitution was promulgated in Cádiz on 19 March 1812. The Constitution of
1812 is regarded as the founding document of liberalism in Spain and one of the
first examples of classical liberalism or conservative liberalism worldwide. It
came to be called the "sacred code" of the branch of liberalism that rejected
the French Revolution, and during the early nineteenth century it served as a
model for liberal constitutions of several Mediterranean and Latin American
nations. It served as the model for the Norwegian Constitution of 1814, the
Portuguese Constitution of 1822 and the Mexican one of 1824, and was
implemented with minor modifications in various Italian states by the Carbonari
during their revolt of 1820 and 1821. As the principal aim of the new
constitution was the prevention of arbitrary and corrupt royal rule, it
provided for a limited monarchy which governed through ministers subject to
parliamentary control. Suffrage, which was not determined by property
qualifications, favored the position of the commercial class in the new
parliament, since there was no special provision for the Church or the
nobility. The constitution set up a rational and efficient centralized
administrative system for the whole monarchy based on newly reformed and
uniform provincial governments and municipalities, rather than maintaining some
form of the varied, historical local governmental structures. Repeal of
traditional property restrictions gave liberals the freer economy they wanted.
The first provincial government created under the Constitution was in the
province of Guadalajara con Molina. Its deputation first met in the village of
Anguita in April 1813, since the capital Guadalajara was the site of ongoing
fighting. Establishment of Spanish active and passive citizenship. Among the
most debated questions during the drafting of the constitution was the status
of the native and mix-race populations in Spain's possessions around the world.
Most of the overseas provinces were represented, especially the most populous
regions. Both the Viceroyalty of New Spain and the Viceroyalty of Peru had
deputies present, as did Central America, the islands of the Spanish Caribbean,
Florida, Chile, Upper Peru and the Philippines. The total number of
representatives was 303, of which thirty-seven were born in overseas
territories, although several of these were temporary, substitute deputies
["suplentes"] elected by American refugees in the city of Cadiz: seven from New
Spain, two from Central America, five from Peru, two from Chile, three from the
Río de la Plata, three from New Granada, and two from Venezuela, one from
Santo Domingo, two from Cuba, one from Puerto Rico and two from the
Philippines. Although most of the overseas representatives were Criollos, the
majority wanted to extend suffrage to all indigenous, mixed-race and free black
people of the Spanish Empire, which would have granted the overseas territories
a majority in the future Cortes. The majority of representatives from
peninsular Spain opposed those proposals as they wished to limit the weight of
non-"peninsulares". According to the best estimates of the time, continental
Spain had an estimated population of between 10 and 11 million, while the
overseas provinces had a combined population of around 15 to 16 million. The
Cortes ultimately approved a distinction between nationality and citizenship
(that is, those with the right to vote). The Constitution defined as Spanish
nationals all people born, naturalized or permanently residing for more than
ten years in Spanish territories. Article 1 of the Constitution read: "The
Spanish nation is the collectivity of the Spaniards of both hemispheres."
Voting rights were granted to Spanish nationals whose ancestry originated from
Spain or the territories of the Spanish Empire. This had the effect of changing
the legal status of the people not only in peninsular Spain but in Spanish
possessions overseas. In the latter case, not only did people of Spanish
ancestry, but indigenous peoples as well, were transformed from the subjects of
an absolute monarch to the citizens of a nation rooted in the doctrine of
national, rather than royal, sovereignty. At the same time, the Constitution
recognized the civil rights of free blacks and "mulatos" but explicitly denied
them automatic citizenship. Furthermore they were not to be counted for the
purposes of establishing the number of representatives a given province was to
send to the Cortes. This had the effect of removing an estimated six million
people from the rolls in the overseas territories. In part this arrangement was
a strategy by the peninsular deputies to achieve equality in the number of
American and peninsular deputies in the future Cortes, but it also served the
interests of conservative Criollo representatives, who wished to keep political
power within a limited group of people. The peninsular deputies, for the most
part, were also not inclined towards ideas of federalism promoted by many of
the overseas deputies, which would have granted greater self-rule to the
American and Asian territories. Most of the "peninsulares", therefore, shared
the absolutists' inclination towards centralized government. Another aspect of
the treatment of the overseas territories in the constitution —one of the
many that would prove not to be to the taste of Ferdinand VII— that by
converting these territories to provinces, the king was deprived of a great
economic resource. Under the "Antiguo Régimen", the taxes from Spain's
overseas possessions went directly to the royal treasury; under the
Constitution of 1812, it would go to the state administrative apparatus. The
influence of the 1812 Constitution on the emerging states of Latin America was
quite direct. Miguel Ramos Arizpe of Mexico, Joaquín Fernández de Leiva of
Chile, Vicente Morales Duárez of Peru and José Mejía Lequerica of Ecuador,
among other significant figures in founding American republics, were active
participants at Cádiz. One provision of the Constitution, which provided for
the creation of a local government (an "ayuntamiento") for every settlement of
over 1,000 people, using a form of indirect election that favored the wealthy
and socially prominent, came from a proposal by Ramos Arizpe. This benefited
the bourgeoisie at the expense of the hereditary aristocracy both on the
Peninsula and in the Americas, and in the Americas, it was particularly to the
advantage of the Criollos, since they came to dominate the "ayuntamientos". It
also brought in a certain measure of federalism through the back door, both on
the peninsula and overseas: elected bodies at the local and provincial level
might not always be in lockstep with the central government. Repeal and
restoration. When Ferdinand VII was restored in March 1814 by the Allied
Powers, it is not clear whether he immediately made up his mind as to whether
to accept or reject this new charter of Spanish government. He first promised
to uphold the constitution, but was repeatedly met in numerous towns by crowds
who welcomed him as an absolute monarch, often smashing the markers that had
renamed their central plazas as Plaza of the Constitution. Sixty-nine deputies
of the Cortes signed the so-called "Manifiesto de los Persas" ("Manifesto of
the Persians") encouraging him to restore absolutism. Within a matter of weeks,
encouraged by conservatives and backed by the Roman Catholic Church hierarchy,
he abolished the constitution on 4 May and arrested many liberal leaders on 10
May, justifying his actions as the repudiation of an unlawful constitution made
by a Cortes assembled in his absence and without his consent. Thus he came back
to assert the Bourbon doctrine that the sovereign authority resided in his
person only. Ferdinand's absolutist rule rewarded the traditional holders of
power—prelates, nobles and those who held office before 1808—but not
liberals, who wished to see a constitutional monarchy in Spain, or many who led
the war effort against the French but had not been part of the pre-war
government. This discontent resulted in several unsuccessful attempts to
restore the Constitution in the five years after Ferdinand's restoration.
Finally on 1 January 1820 Rafael del Riego, Antonio Quiroga and other officers
initiated a mutiny of army officers in Andalusia demanding the implementation
of the Constitution. The movement found support among the northern cities and
provinces of Spain, and by 7 March the king had restored the Constitution. Over
the next two years, the other European monarchies became alarmed at the
liberals' success and at the Congress of Verona in 1822 approved the
intervention of French forces in Spain to support Ferdinand VII. After the
Battle of Trocadero liberated Ferdinand from control by the Cortes in August
1823, he turned on the liberals and constitutionalists with fury. After
Ferdinand's death in 1833, the Constitution was in force again briefly in 1836
and 1837, while the Constitution of 1837 was being drafted. Since 1812, Spain
has had a total of seven constitutions; the current one has been in force since
1978.
