Fiscal multiplier In economics, the fiscal multiplier is the ratio of a change
in national income to the change in government spending that causes it. More
generally, the exogenous spending multiplier is the ratio of a change in
national income to any autonomous change in spending (private investment
spending, consumer spending, government spending, or spending by foreigners on
the country's exports) that causes it. When this multiplier exceeds one, the
enhanced effect on national income is called the multiplier effect. The
mechanism that can give rise to a multiplier effect is that an initial
incremental amount of spending can lead to increased consumption spending,
increasing income further and hence further increasing consumption, etc.,
resulting in an overall increase in national income greater than the initial
incremental amount of spending. In other words, an initial change in aggregate
demand may cause a change in aggregate output (and hence the aggregate income
that it generates) that is a multiple of the initial change. The existence of a
multiplier effect was initially proposed by Keynes student Richard Kahn in 1930
and published in 1931. Some other schools of economic thought reject or
downplay the importance of multiplier effects, particularly in terms of the
long run. The multiplier effect has been used as an argument for the efficacy
of government spending or taxation relief to stimulate aggregate demand. In
certain cases multiplier values less than one have been empirically measured
(an example is sports stadiums), suggesting that certain types of government
spending crowd out private investment or consumer spending that would have
otherwise taken place. This crowding out can occur because the initial increase
in spending may cause an increase in interest rates or in the price level. In
2009, because of the use of fiscal multipliers to project the benefits of the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009, The Economist magazine noted
"economists are in fact deeply divided about how well, or indeed whether, such
stimulus works" due to a lack of empirical data from non-military based
stimulus. Immediately after the stimulus bill took effect, job loss slowed and
private sector job growth resumed in 2010 and has continued through 2012. Net
Government Spending. The other important aspect of the multiplier, is that to
the extent that government spending generates new consumption, it also
generates "new" tax revenues. For example, when money is spent in a shop,
purchases taxes such as VAT are paid on the expenditure, and the shopkeeper
earns a higher income, and thus pays more income taxes. Therefore, although the
government spends $1, it is likely that it receives back a significant
proportion of the $1 in due course, making the net expenditure much less than
$1. Indeed, in theory, it is possible, if the initial expenditure is targeted
well, that the government could receive back more than the initial $1 expended.
Examples. For example: a company spends $1 million to build a factory. The
money does not disappear, but rather becomes wages to builders, revenue to
suppliers etc. The builders will have higher disposable income, and consumption
may rise, so that aggregate demand will also rise. Suppose further that
recipients of the new spending by the builder in turn spend their new income,
this will raise demand and possibly consumption further, and so on. The
increase in the gross domestic product is the sum of the increases in net
income of everyone affected. If the builder receives $1 million and pays out
$800,000 to sub contractors, he has a net income of $200,000 and a
corresponding increase in disposable income (the amount remaining after taxes).
This process proceeds down the line through subcontractors and their employees,
each experiencing an increase in disposable income to the degree the new work
they perform does not displace other work they are already performing. Each
participant who experiences an increase in disposable income then spends some
portion of it on final (consumer) goods, according to his or her marginal
propensity to consume, which causes the cycle to repeat an arbitrary number of
times, limited only by the spare capacity available. Another example: when
tourists visit somewhere they need to buy the plane ticket, catch a taxi from
the airport to the hotel, book in at the hotel, eat at the restaurant and go to
the movies or tourist destination. The taxi driver needs petrol (gasoline) for
his cab, the hotel needs to hire the staff, the restaurant needs attendants and
chefs, and the movies and tourist destinations need staff and cleaners.
Applications. The multiplier effect is a tool used by governments to attempt to
stimulate aggregate demand. This can be done in a period of recession or
economic uncertainty. The money invested by a government creates more jobs,
which in turn will mean more spending and so on. The idea is that the net
increase in disposable income by all parties throughout the economy will be
greater than the original investment. When that is the case, the government can
increase the gross domestic product by an amount that is greater than an
increase in the amount it spends relative to the amount it collects in taxes.
The difference is the fiscal stimulus. The net fiscal stimulus may be increased
by raising spending above the level of tax revenues, reducing taxes below the
level of government spending, or any combination of the two that results in the
government taxing less than it spends. The resulting deficit spending must be
financed from government reserves (if any) or net borrowing from private or
foreign investors. If the money is borrowed, it must eventually be paid back
with interest, such that the long term effect on the economy depends on the
trade off between the immediate increase to the GDP and the long term cost of
servicing the resulting government debt. Because businesses hire based on
profits earned and available work for new employees, and not money in pocket,
the goal of best utilizing the multiplier effect is to seed the money as close
to the consumer base as possible, where it can be spent on industries, who will
then hire new employees, who will spend their paychecks on more industries,
creating a cycle. The extent of the multiplier effect is dependent upon the
marginal propensity to consume and marginal propensity to import. Also that the
multiplier can work in reverse as well, so an initial fall in spending can
trigger further falls in aggregate output. The concept of the economic
multiplier on a macroeconomic scale can be extended to any economic region. For
example, building a new factory may lead to new employment for locals, which
may have knock-on economic effects for the city or region. Various types of
fiscal multipliers. The following values are theoretical values based on
simplified models, and the empirical values corresponding to the reality have
been found to be lower (see below). Note: In the following examples the
multiplier is the right-hand-side equation without the first component.
Standard Income Tax Equation. Note: only formula_6 is here because if this is a
change in income tax rate then formula_5 is implied to be 0. Estimated values.
United States of America. In congressional testimony given in July 2008, Mark
Zandi, chief economist for Moody's Economy.com, provided estimates of the one-
year multiplier effect for several fiscal policy options. The multipliers
showed that any form of increased government spending would have more of a
multiplier effect than any form of tax cuts. The most effective policy, a
temporary increase in food stamps, had an estimated multiplier of 1.73. The
lowest multiplier for a spending increase was general aid to state governments,
1.36. Among tax cuts, multipliers ranged from 1.29 for a payroll tax holiday
down to 0.27 for accelerated depreciation. Making the Bush tax cuts permanent
had the second-lowest multiplier, 0.29. Refundable lump-sum tax rebates, the
policy used in the Economic Stimulus Act of 2008, had the second-largest
multiplier for a tax cut, 1.26. Robert J. Barro estimated that government
spending has a short-term multiplier of around 0.4-0.6, meaning for every $1.00
of government spending, overall GDP increases by $0.40-$0.60 GDP. In addition,
the spending must be repaid in the future most likely with tax increases which
he assumes to have a multiplier of -1.1. This results in a further decrease in
GDP and concludes that government spending actually has more cost than benefit.
According to Otto Eckstein, estimation has found "textbook" values of
multipliers are overstated. The following tables has assumptions about monetary
policy along the left hand side. Along the top is whether the multiplier value
is for a change in government spending (ΔG) or a tax cut (-ΔT). The above
table is for the fourth quarter under which a permanent change in policy is in
force. More recently three economists with the NBER and IMF have published a
working paper examining economic features that impact fiscal multipliers. They
found that the output effect of an increase in government consumption is larger
in industrial than in developing countries, the fiscal multiplier is relatively
large in economies operating under predetermined exchange rate but zero in
economies operating under flexible exchange rates; fiscal multipliers in open
economies are lower than in closed economies and fiscal multipliers in high-
debt countries are also zero. Europe. Italian economists have estimated
multiplier values ranging from 1.4 up to 2.0 when dynamic effects are accounted
for. The economists used mafia influence as an instrumental variable to help
estimate the effect of central funds given to local councils. IMF. In October
2012 the International Monetary Fund released their Global Prospects and
Policies document in which an admission was made that their assumptions about
fiscal multipliers had been inaccurate. This admission has serious implications
for economies such as the UK where the OBR used the IMF's assumptions in their
economic forecasts about the consequences of the government's austerity
policies. It has been conservatively estimated by the TUC that the OBR's use of
the IMF's under-estimated fiscal multiplication values means that they may have
under-estimated the economic damage caused by the UK government's austerity
policies by £76 billion. In their 2012 Forecast Evaluation Report the OBR
admitted that underestimated fiscal multipliers could be responsible for their
over-optimistic economic forecasts. Criticisms. Crowding out. It has been
claimed that fiscal activity does not always lead to increased economic
activity because deficit spending used to finance spending or tax cuts can
crowd out financing for other economic activity. This phenomenon is argued to
be less likely to occur in a recession, where savings rates are traditionally
higher and capital is not being fully utilized in the private market. Marginal
Propensity to Consume. As has been discussed, the Multiplier relies on the MPC
(Marginal Propensity to Consume). The use of the term MPC here, is a reference
to the MPC of a country (or similar economic unit) as a whole, and the theory
and the mathematical formulae apply to this use of the term. However,
individuals have an MPC, and furthermore MPC is not homogeneous across society.
Even if it was, the nature of the consumption is not homogeneous. Some
consumption may be seen as more benevolent (to the economy) than others.
Therefore spending could be targeted where it would do most benefit, and thus
generate the highest (closest to 1) MPC. This has traditionally been regarded
as construction or other major projects (which also bring a direct benefit in
the form of the finished product). Clearly, some sectors of society are likely
to have a much higher MPC than others. Someone with above average wealth or
income or both may have a very low (short term, at least) MPC of nearly zero -
saving most of any extra income. But a pensioner, for example, will have an MPC
of 1 or even greater than 1. This is because a pensioner is quite likely to
spend every penny of any extra income. Further, if the extra income is seen as
regular extra income, and guaranteed into the future, the pensioner may
actually spend MORE than the extra £1. This would occur where the extra income
stream gives confidence that the individual does not need to put aside as much
in the form of savings, or perhaps can even dip into existing savings. More
importantly, this consumption is much more likely to occur in local small
business - local shops, pubs and other leisure activities for example. These
types of businesses are themselves likely to have a high MPC, and again the
nature of their consumption is likely to be in the same, or next tier of
businesses, and also of a benevolent nature. Other individuals with a high, and
benevolent, MPC would include almost anyone on a low income - students, parents
with young children, and the unemployed. Externalities. It has also been argued
that over-reliance upon fiscal multipliers can lead to the neglect of
externalities such as environmental degredation, unsustainable resource
depletion or social consequences. Negative consequences of over-reliance upon
fiscal multiplication values can either be envisaged in increased government
spending on activities with high fiscal multiplication values which create
negative externalities (pollution, climate change, resource depletion, etc.) or
through decreased spending on activities which create low immediate fiscal
multiplication values but create positive externalities (educational standards,
social cohesion, public health, etc.).
