St. Petersburg Democratic Club (United States) The Saint Petersburg Democratic
Club is a political organization in St. Petersburg, Florida, which supports the
Florida Democratic Party. In April 2004, it attracted massive negative national
attention after placing an advertisement in a Gulfport, Florida weekly "The
Gabber"mildly suggesting the killing of United States Secretary of Defense
Donald Rumsfeld. The language used in the ad parodied that used by Rumsfeld
referring to the 2003 invasion of Iraq. The advertisement generated short-lived
but high-profile attention in the national news media as a result of its
hyperbolic tone, and was condemned by leaders of both major political parties.
As a result, the President of the club - Kenneth Stenke - who had previously
been removed as a member of the Pinellas County Democratic Executive Committee
- offered to resign and allow his vice-president to take over. When she was
quoted in the local daily newspaper (St. Petersburg Times) as supporting Ken
100% the die was cast. The Board of Directors of the Executive Committee, under
strong pressure from the Florida Democratic Party, voted to withdraw the
Charter of the St. Petersburg Democratic Club. The Club dug in its
heels,organizing itself under the corporate protection of the State of Florida,
and continued to operate as an independent organization supporting Democratic
candidates. In 2007, Mr.Stenke passed on and Jim Donelon was elected President.
Mr. Donelon had been a Board member when the vote was taken to withdraw the
Charter and had voted in the affirmative. He later came before the membership
of the Club and admitted that the vote was a mistake on his part. A vote of the
membership was taken in late 2007 and it was agreed to re-apply for the Charter
from the Florida Democratic Party which required the support of the Chair of
the Pinellas County Democratic Executive Committee, Toni Molenari. After
extensive negotiations and a number of delays the Charter was approved and
presented to Mr. Donelon by the Chair at a meeting of the St. Petersburg
Democratic Club.
