Stalinism Stalinism is the ideology that Joseph Stalin conceived and
implemented in the Soviet Union, and is generally considered a branch of
Marxist–Leninist ideology but considered by some historians to be a
significant deviation from this philosophy. Stalinist policies in the Soviet
Union included: rapid industrialization, socialism in one country, a
centralized state, collectivization of agriculture, and subordination of
interests of other communist parties to those of the Soviet party - deemed to
be the most forefront vanguard party of communist revolution at the time.
Stalinist rapid industrialization in the Soviet Union was officially designed
to accelerate the Marxian development towards communism, stressing that such
rapid industrialization was needed because the country was previously
economically backward in comparison with other countries; and that it was
needed in order to challenge internal and external enemies of communism. Rapid
industrialization was accompanied with mass collectivization of agriculture and
rapid urbanization. Rapid urbanization converted many small villages into
industrial cities. To accelerate the development of industrialization, Stalin
pragmatically created joint venture contracts with major American private
enterprises, such as Ford Motor Company, that under state supervision assisted
in developing the basis of industry of the Soviet economy from the late 1920s
to 1930s. After the American private enterprises completed their tasks, Soviet
state enterprises took over. Stalinism took an aggressive stance on class
conflict, utilizing state violence to forcibly purge society of the bourgeoisie
such as the affluent middle-class peasant Kulaks and other "class enemies", as
well as claiming that class conflict existed within communist parties. Stalin
committed classicide against the Kulaks for being such class enemies. Stalinism
is commonly used in a negative or pejorative manner due to the known extremely
repressive political actions undertaken by Stalin. The reasons for Stalin's
repressive actions have been debated. One perspective claims that Stalin's
repressive actions were calculated and that he was mentally sane in his
execution of repressive measures. Another perspective claims that Stalin's
repressive political actions were the result of him having mental illness. This
claim states that Stalin likely had the mental disorder of psychopathy and that
its traits such as paranoia and manipulative behaviour influenced his political
decisions. A third perspective claims that Stalinism's repressive actions were
an extension of the prevailing authoritarian and repressive political culture
that originated in Tsarist Russia. Etymology. The term came into prominence
during the mid-1930s, when Lazar Kaganovich, a Soviet politician and associate
of Stalin, reportedly declared, "Let's replace Long Live Leninism with Long
Live Stalinism!" Stalin initially met this usage with hesitancy, dismissing it
as excessively praiseful and contributing to a cult of personality. Stalinist
policies. Stalinism usually denotes a style of a government, and an ideology.
While he claimed to be a perfect adherent to the ideas of Vladimir Lenin and
Karl Marx, and hence claimed that it was merely a style of government, many of
his policies and beliefs were different or in direct opposition to those of
Lenin and Marx. Stalin's ideas of Socialism in one country, his adoption of
many aspects of capitalism, and his turn to complete, permanent dictatorship
were all in stark contradiction to the ideologies put forth by Lenin or Marx.
Stalinism is a certain political regime claiming to apply the ideas of Marx or
Lenin in ways fitting the changing needs of society, as with the transition
from "socialism at a snail's pace" in the mid-1920s to the rapid
industrialization of the Five-Year Plans. Sometimes, although rarely, the
compound terms "Marxism–Leninism–Stalinism" (used by the Brazilian MR-8),
or "teachings of Marx/Engels/Lenin/Stalin", are used to show the alleged
heritage and succession. , however, many people who profess Marxism or Leninism
view Stalinism as a perversion of their ideas; Trotskyists, in particular, are
virulently anti-Stalinist, considering Stalinism a counter-revolutionary style
of governance that used vaguely Marxist-sounding rhetoric to achieve power.
From 1917 to 1924, Lenin, Trotsky, and Stalin often appeared united, but their
ideological differences never disappeared. In his dispute with Leon Trotsky,
Stalin de-emphasized the role of workers in advanced capitalist countries (for
example, he considered the U.S. working class as bourgeoisified labour
aristocracy). Also, Stalin polemicized against Trotsky on the role of peasants,
as in China, whereas Trotsky's position was in favor of urban insurrection over
peasant-based guerrilla warfare. Stalin argued that the state must become
stronger before it can "wither away" in favor of creating a classless Communist
society. In Stalin's view, the state must be powerful enough to defeat
counterrevolutionary elements. For this reason, Communist regimes influenced by
Stalin have been widely described as totalitarian. Soviet puppet Sheng Shicai
extended Stalinist rule in Xinjiang province in the 1930s. Stalin opposed the
Chinese Communist Party, and Sheng conducted a purge similar to Stalin's Great
Purge in 1937. Stalinist economic policy. At the start of the 1930s Stalin
launched a wave of radical economic policies, which completely overhauled the
industrial and agricultural face of the Soviet Union. This came to be known as
the 'Great Turn' as Russia turned away from the near-capitalist New Economic
Policy. The NEP had been implemented by Lenin in order to ensure the survival
of the Communist state following seven years of war (1914–1921, World War I
from 1914 to 1917, and the subsequent Civil War) and had rebuilt Soviet
production to its 1913 levels. However, Russia still lagged far behind the
West, and the NEP was felt by Stalin and the majority of the Communist party,
not only to be compromising Communist ideals, but also not delivering
sufficient economic performance, as well as not creating the envisaged
Socialist society. It was therefore felt necessary to increase the pace of
industrialisation in order to catch up with the West. Fredric Jameson has said
that "Stalinism was [...] a success and fulfilled its historic mission,
socially as well as economically" given that it "modernised the Soviet Union,
transforming a peasant society into an industrial state with a literate
population and a remarkable scientific superstructure." Robert Conquest
disputed such a conclusion and noted that "Russia had already been fourth to
fifth among industrial economies before World War I" and that Russian
industrial advances could have been achieved without collectivisation, famine
or terror. The industrial successes were, according to Conquest, far less than
claimed, and the Soviet-style industrialisation was "an anti-innovative dead-
end", according to him. According to several Western historians, Stalinist
agricultural policies were a key factor in causing the Soviet famine of
1932–1933, which the Ukrainian government now calls "the Holodomor",
recognizing it as an act of genocide. However, there is still considerable
debate in other countries as to whether or not the famine can be recognized as
genocide. Legacy. After Stalin's death in 1953, his successor Nikita Khrushchev
repudiated his policies, condemned Stalin's cult of personality in his Secret
Speech to the Twentieth Party Congress in 1956, and instituted destalinisation
and relative liberalisation (within the same political framework).
Consequently, most of the world's Communist parties, who previously adhered to
Stalinism, abandoned it and, to a greater or lesser degree, adopted the
positions of Khrushchev. A few of the notable exceptions were North Korea under
Kim Il-sung, the People's Republic of China, under Mao Zedong, the Albanian
Party of Labour under Enver Hoxha, the Communist Party of Indonesia, certain
sections of the Communist Party of Vietnam, and the Communist Party of New
Zealand. In countries where the local Communist Party sided with the Communist
Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU) under the leadership of Khrushchev, various
groupings of dissident party members left to begin pre-party formations based
on their specific interpretations of Marxism-Leninism. This process accelerated
as the 1960s progressed into the 1970s, eventually leading to what was called
the New Communist Movement in various countries. For example, in the United
States the New Communist Movement led to a plethora of formations, among them
the Progressive Labour Party, the Revolutionary Communist Party, USA, the
Freedom Road Socialist Organization, and the October League, amongst others.
Kim simply purged the North Korean Communist party of de-Stalinisation
advocates, either executing them or forcing them into exile or labour camps.
Under Mao, the People's Republic grew antagonistic towards what they saw as the
new Soviet leadership's "revisionism", resulting in the Sino-Soviet Split in
1960. Subsequently, China independently pursued the ideology of Maoism, which
still largely supported the legacy of Stalin and his policies. The Socialist
People's Republic of Albania took the Chinese party's side in the Sino-Soviet
Split and remained committed, at least theoretically, to Hoxhaism, its brand of
Stalinism, for decades thereafter, under the leadership of Enver Hoxha. Despite
their initial cooperation against "revisionism," Hoxha denounced Mao as a
revisionist, along with almost every other self-identified Communist
organization in the world. This had the effect of isolating Albania from the
rest of the world, as Hoxha was hostile to both the pro-USA and pro-Soviet
spheres of influence, as well as the Non-Aligned Movement under the leadership
of Josip Broz Tito, whom Hoxha had also denounced. The ousting of Khrushchev in
1964 by his former party-state allies has been described as a Stalinist
restoration by some, epitomised by the Brezhnev Doctrine and the apparatchik/
nomenklatura "stability of cadres," lasting until the period of glasnost and
perestroika in the late 1980s and the fall of the Soviet Union. Some historians
and writers (like German Dietrich Schwanitz) draw parallels between Stalinism
and the economic policy of Tsar Peter the Great, although Schwanitz in
particular views Stalin as "a monstrous reincarnation" of him. Both men wanted
Russia to leave the western European states far behind in terms of development.
Both largely succeeded, turning Russia into Europe's leading power. Others
compare Stalin with Ivan the Terrible because of his policies of oprichnina and
restriction of the liberties of common people. Some analysts like Aleksandr
Solzhenitsyn in "The Mortal Danger: Misconceptions about Soviet Russia and the
Threat to America" consider the use of the term "Stalinism" is an excuse to
hide the inevitable effects of communism as a whole on human liberties. He
writes that the concept of Stalinism was developed after 1956 by western
intellectuals so as to be able to keep alive the communist ideal. The term
"Stalinism" however was in use as early as 1937 when Leon Trotsky wrote his
pamphlet "Stalinism and Bolshevism". Trotskyism. Trotskyists argue that the
"Stalinist USSR" was not socialist (and not communist), but a bureaucratised
degenerated workers' state — that is, a non-capitalist state in which
exploitation is controlled by a ruling caste which, although not owning the
means of production and not constituting a social class in its own right,
accrued benefits and privileges at the expense of the working class. Some in
the Third Camp use bureaucratic collectivism as a theory to critique Stalinist
forms of government. In foreign affairs the distinction between Trotskyism and
Stalinism was even sharper. Trotsky believed that the Russian revolution needed
to be spread all over the globe's working class, the proletarians for world
revolution; Stalin insisted on consolidating Bolshevism in Russia and
industrialization, "socialism in one country." The dispute did not end until
Trotsky's assassination in his Mexican villa by the communist assassin, Ramon
Mercader in 1940. Council Communism. Although worker's councils were
politically significant in the earliest stages of the Soviet Union, they soon
lost their power and significance as political power was concentrated in the
hands of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU). The operation of the
Soviet Union under Stalinism was almost entirely undemocratic, vesting absolute
power into unelected bureaucrats. This was abhorent to council communists, who
believe that workers' councils, or communes, embody the fundamental principles
of socialism, such as workers' control over production and distribution.
Indeed, some have described council communism as "socialism from below," which
they counterpose against what they see as the "socialism from above" that was
endorsed by Stalinism. According to this view, socialism from above is carried
out by a centralized state run by an elite bureaucratic apparatus, whereas
socialism from below represents the self-administration and self-rule of the
working class. Council communists described the Soviet Union as a capitalist
state, believing that the Bolshevik revolution in Russia became a "bourgeois
revolution" when a party bureaucracy replaced the old feudal aristocracy.
Although most council communists felt the Russian Revolution was working class
in character, they believed that the Soviet Union was a state capitalist
country, with the state replacing the individual capitalists (an additional
argument in favour of that was the continued existence of capitalist relations,
as manifested e.g. in the New Economic Policy). The core principle of council
communism is that the government and the economy should be managed by workers'
councils composed of delegates elected at workplaces and recallable at any
moment. As such, council communists oppose the idea of an authoritarian "State
socialist"/"State capitalist" planned economy such as in the Soviet Union. They
also oppose the idea of a "revolutionary party", since council communists
believe that a revolution led by a party will necessarily produce a party
dictatorship. Council communists support a worker's democracy, which they want
to produce through a federation of workers' councils. Left communists like C.
L. R. James and the Italian autonomists, as well as unorthodox Trotskyists like
Tony Cliff, described Stalinism as "state capitalism"i.e., a form of capitalism
where the state takes over the role of capital. Milovan Đilas argues that a
New Class arose under Stalinism, a theory also put forward by various liberal
theorists. "Socialisme ou Barbarie". Socialisme ou Barbarie, led by philosopher
Cornelius Castoriadis, was a radical Marxist and libertarian socialist group
based in France that significantly developed the council communist tradition as
well as laying the foundation for autonomism. Socialisme ou Barbarie harshly
criticised the communist regime in the USSR, which it considered a form of
"bureaucratic capitalism" and not at all the socialism it claimed to be.
Philosopher Jean-François Lyotard was also part of this movement. Situationist
International. The Situationist International was a group of strongly anti-
authoritarian Marxist theorists, influenced by the early 20th century avant-
garde art movements in Europe, chiefly led by Guy Debord and Raoul Vaneigem.
The Situationists were ruthlessly critical of Stalin and the Soviet Union,
which they regarded as an oppressive undemocratic bureaucracy that was just as
freedom-deprived as capitalist society, if not more so. The Situationists
believed that Stalinist practices amounted to a complete rejection of Marxism,
and that the hierarchy of power was identical in practice to capitalist
society, arguing that a class of high-ranking bureaucrats and party officials
had replaced the bourgeoisie. In contrast to Stalin's sprawling authoritarian
and totalitarian state, the Situationists favored democratic workers' councils
and workers' self-management intended to empower every individual equally and
prevent anyone from centralizing power. Anarchism. Anarchists like Emma Goldman
were initially enthusiastic about the Bolsheviks, particularly after
dissemination of Lenin's pamphlet "State and Revolution", which painted
Bolshevism in a very libertarian light. However, the relations between the
anarchists and the Bolsheviks soured in Soviet Russia (e.g., in the suppression
of the Kronstadt rebellion and the Makhnovist movement). Anarchists and
Stalinist Communists were also in armed conflict during the Spanish civil war.
Anarchists are critical of the statist, totalitarian nature of Stalinism, as
well as its cult of personality around Stalin (and subsequent leaders seen by
anarchists as Stalinists, such as Mao). Social anarchism sees "individual
freedom as conceptually connected with social equality and emphasize community
and mutual aid.". Social anarchists argue that this goal can be achieved
through the decentralization of political and economic power, distributing
power equally among all individuals, and finally abolishing authoritarian
institutions which control certain means of production. Social anarchism
rejects private property, seeing it as a source of social inequality. Social
Anarchism political philosophies almost always share strong characteristics of
anti-authoritarianism, anti-capitalism and anti-statism. As the Soviet Union
under Stalin manifested itself as a strong centralized authoritarian state,
Stalinism and libertarian socialism are almost directly opposed. Democratic
socialism. Peter Hain defines democratic socialism as a form of anti-
authoritarian "socialism from below", in contrast to Stalinism and Social
democracy, which are variants of authoritarian state socialism. A significant
current of the democratic socialist movement has defined itself in opposition
to Stalinism. This includes George Orwell and the Independent Labour Party in
Britain (particularly after World War II), the group around Marceau Pivert in
France and, in America, the New York Intellectuals around the "Partisan
Review". These democratic socialists saw Stalinism as a form of totalitarianism
in some ways mirroring fascism. Hillel Ticktin / "Critique". In the journal
"Critique (Journal of Socialist Theory)", Hillel H. Ticktin argues that the new
Soviet rulers found themselves unable to use the market to control and exploit
the peasantry and workers. So, instead, they used vast coercion, in the form of
forced collectivisation, enabling them to both control the peasantry and to
create an influx of new labour for rapid industrial expansion. Unprecedented
levels of repression prevented any collective resistance. But, with little fear
of unemployment and little monetary incentive to work harder, individual
workers were still able to resist management interference. Workers also
indulged in less-productive working, absenteeism and alcoholism. This Stalinist
system was neither socialist nor capitalist. Neither workers nor managers
really controlled the work process and this created enormous inefficiencies and
waste. As long as industry kept expanding by using new labour from the
countryside, these inefficiencies could be covered up. But - Ticktin says -
once this labour source "dried up, as it did in the mid-1970s, the regime was
doomed". Ticktin also argues that the problems of post-Soviet Russia - which
are exacerbated by the continuing decline of capitalism - show that Russia is
still, essentially, a "disintegrating Stalinism". Relationship to Leninism. The
historiography of Stalin is diverse, with many different aspects of continuity
and discontinuity between the regimes of Stalin and Lenin proposed.
Totalitarian historians such as Richard Pipes tend to see Stalinism as the
natural consequence of Leninism, that Stalin "faithfully implemented Lenin's
domestic and foreign policy programmes". More nuanced versions of this general
view are to be found in the works of other Western historians, such as Robert
Service, who notes that "institutionally and ideologically, Lenin laid the
foundations for a Stalin... but the passage from Leninism to the worse terrors
of Stalinism was not smooth and inevitable." Likewise, historian Edvard
Radzinsky believes that Stalin was a real follower of Lenin, exactly as he
claimed himself. Proponents of continuity cite a variety of contributory
factors: it is argued that it was Lenin, rather than Stalin, whose civil war
measures introduced the Red Terror with its hostage taking and internment
camps, that it was Lenin who developed the infamous Article 58, and who
established the autocratic system within the Communist Party. They also note
that Lenin put a ban on factions within the Russian Communist Party and
introduced the one-party state in 1921 - a move that enabled Stalin to get rid
of his rivals easily after Lenin's death, and cite Felix Dzerzhinsky, who,
during the Bolshevik struggle against opponents in the Russian Civil War,
exclaimed "We stand for organised terror – this should be frankly stated".
Opponents of this view include revisionist historians and a number of
post–Cold War and otherwise dissident Soviet historians including Roy
Medvedev, who argues that although "one could list the various measures carried
out by Stalin that were actually a continuation of anti-democratic trends and
measures implemented under Lenin... in so many ways, Stalin acted, not in line
with Lenin's clear instructions, but in defiance of them". In doing so, some
historians have tried to distance Stalinism from Leninism in order to undermine
the Totalitarian view that the negative facets of Stalin (terror, etc.) were
inherent in Communism from the start. Critics of this kind include anti-
Stalinist communists such as Leon Trotsky, who pointed out that Lenin attempted
to persuade the CPSU to remove Stalin from his post as its General Secretary.
Lenin's Testament, the document which contained this order, was suppressed
after Lenin's death. British historian Isaac Deutscher, in his biography of
Trotsky, says that on being faced with the evidence "only the blind and the
deaf could be unaware of the contrast between Stalinism and Leninism". A
similar analysis is present in more recent works, such as those of Graeme Gill,
who argues that "was not a natural flow-on of earlier developments; formed a
sharp break resulting from conscious decisions by leading political actors."
Claims of Stalinism being "Red fascism". Stalinism has been considered by some
reviewers as a "Red fascism". The "New York Times" dubbed Stalinism "red
fascism". Though fascist regimes were ideologically opposed to the Soviet
Union, some of them positively regarded Stalinism as evolving Bolshevism into a
form of fascism. Benito Mussolini positively reviewed Stalinism as having
transformed Soviet Bolshevism into a Slavic fascism. Despite ideological
differences and holding territorial claims on the Soviet Union, Adolf Hitler
admired Stalin and his politics and believed that Stalin was in effect
transforming Soviet Bolshevism into a form of Nazism.
