Standard of deferred payment A standard of deferred payment is the accepted
way, in a given market, to settle a debt – a unit in which debts are
denominated. It is one of the defining functions of money; for example, while
the gold standard reigned, gold or any currency convertible to gold at a fixed
rate constituted such a standard. As of 2010, the US dollar and the euro are
the most generally accepted standards for international settlements. The term
"standard of deferred payment" is not as widely used as other terms for
functions of money, namely medium of exchange, store of value, and unit of
account, though it is distinguished in some works. Functions of money. However,
many newer texts do not distinguish the function of a standard of deferred
payment, subsuming it in other functions. When currency is stable, money can
serve all four functions. When it is not, or when complex and volatile forms of
financial capital are involved, some may wish to identify a single standard of
deferred payment to avoid cheating by selecting a denominator of debt that one
believes to be dropping in value. Relation to debt. A debt is a deferred
payment; a standard of deferred payment is what they are denominated in. Since
the value of money – be it dollars, gold, or others – may fluctuate over
time via inflation and deflation, the value of deferred payments (the real
level of debt) likewise fluctuates. A device is termed "legal tender" if it may
serve to discharge (pay off) debts; thus, while US dollars are not backed by
gold or any other commodity, they draw value from being legal tender – being
usable to pay off debts. Examples. Deferred payment is based on enforceability
of debts and rule of law, and is not used or rarely used when debts are
unlikely to be collectable. For certain kinds of transactions (such as for
illegal goods like drugs or weapons), gold, diamonds or bitcoins may be
preferred as the medium of exchange — there being no recourse in case of
counterfeit currency being used — and there is rarely any deferral of
payment: if there is, it will most likely be stated in dollars. Historically,
there have been many times when creditors have had to hide from debtors to
avoid being paid off in near worthless currency, typically following hyper-
inflation. Time-based currency such as Ithaca Hours establishes fixed amounts
of human labour as the only standard of deferred payment.
