Standard of living Standard of living refers to the level of wealth, comfort,
material goods and necessities available to a certain socioeconomic class in a
certain geographic area. The standard of living includes factors such as
income, quality and availability of employment, class disparity, poverty rate,
quality and affordability of housing, hours of work required to purchase
necessities, gross domestic product, inflation rate, number of vacation days
per year, affordable (or free) access to quality healthcare, quality and
availability of education, life expectancy, incidence of disease, cost of goods
and services, infrastructure, national economic growth, economic and political
stability, political and religious freedom, environmental quality, climate and
safety. The standard of living is closely related to quality of life. Standard
of living is generally measured by standards such as real (i.e. inflation
adjusted) income per person and poverty rate. Other measures such as access and
quality of health care, income growth inequality, Disposable Energy (people's
disposable income's ability to buy energy) and educational standards are also
used. Examples are access to certain goods (such as number of refrigerators per
1000 people), or measures of health such as life expectancy. It is the ease by
which people living in a time or place are able to satisfy their needs and/or
wants. The idea of a 'standard' may be contrasted with the quality of life,
which takes into account not only the material standard of living, but also
other more intangible aspects that make up human life, such as leisure, safety,
cultural resources, social life, physical health, environmental quality issues,
etc. More complex means of measuring well-being must be employed to make such
judgements, and these are very often political, thus controversial. Even
between two nations or societies that have similar material standards of
living, quality of life factors may in fact make one of these places more
attractive to a given individual or group. However, there can be problems even
with just using numerical averages to compare material standards of living, as
opposed to, for instance, a Pareto index (a measure of the breadth of income or
wealth distribution). Standards of living are perhaps inherently subjective. As
an example, countries with a very small, very rich upper class and a very
large, very poor lower class may have a high mean level of income, even though
the majority of people have a low "standard of living". This mirrors the
problem of poverty measurement, which also tends towards the relative. This
illustrates how distribution of income can disguise the actual standard of
living. Likewise Country A, a perfectly state capitalist country with a planned
economy with very low average per capita income would receive a higher score
for having lower income inequality than Country B with a higher income
inequality, even if the bottom of Country B's population distribution had a
higher per capita income than Country A. Real examples of this include former
East Germany compared to former West Germany or North Korea compared to South
Korea. In each case, the state capitalist country has a low income discrepancy
(and therefore would score high in that regard), but lower per capita incomes
than a large majority of their neighboring counterpart. This can be avoided by
using the measure of income at various percentiles of the population rather
than a highly relative and controversial overall income inequality measure.
