Starve the beast "Starving the beast" is a political strategy employed by
American conservatives in order to limit government spendingby cutting taxes in
order to deprive the government of revenue in a deliberate effort to force the
federal government to reduce spending. The short and medium term effect of the
strategy has increased United States public debt rather than reduced spending.
The term "the beast" in this context refers to the American government and the
programs it funds, particularly social programs such as welfare, Social
Security, and Medicare; and does not usually refer to spending on military, law
enforcement or prisons. History. On July 14, 1978, economist Alan Greenspan
gave testimony to the U.S. Finance Committee: "Let us remember that the basic
purpose of any tax cut program in today's environment is to reduce the momentum
of expenditure growth by restraining the amount of revenue available and trust
that there is a political limit to deficit spending." Prior to being elected as
the President, then-candidate Ronald Reagan foreshadowed the strategy during
the 1980 US Presidential debates, saying "John Anderson tells us that first
we've got to reduce spending before we can reduce taxes. Well, if you've got a
kid that's extravagant, you can lecture him all you want to about his
extravagance. Or you can cut his allowance and achieve the same end much
quicker." The metaphor was too simplistic to account for the spending of a kid
who could borrow without near-term or medium-term limits. The earliest use of
the actual term "starving the beast" to refer to the political-fiscal strategy
(as opposed to its conceptual premise) was in a "Wall Street Journal" article
in 1985 where the reporter quoted an unnamed Reagan staffer. Since 2000. The
tax cuts and deficit spending of former US President George W. Bush's
administration were attempts to "starve the beast." Bush said in 2001 "so we
have the tax relief plan [...] that now provides a new kind—a fiscal
straightjacket for Congress. And that's good for the taxpayers, and it's
incredibly positive news if you're worried about a federal government that has
been growing at a dramatic pace over the past eight years and it has been."
Republican presidential candidate Fred Thompson's tax-cut plan, incorporating a
flat tax, also defers paying for the larger deficits it would create. It "would
most likely be funded by lower government spending on Social Security and
Medicare benefits" according to the Wall Street Journal.[http://online.wsj.com/
article/SB119603890284403477.html?mod=googlenews_wsj Political activist Grover
Norquist authored an oath, the so-called "Taxpayer Protection Pledge," that 279
Senators and Congressman have signed. The oath states the signatories will
never vote to raise taxes on anyone under any circumstances. It is viewed by
some of the unsigned as a stumbling block to mutual fiscal negotiations to
benefit the country. Economic analysis. James M. Buchanan, a Nobel Prize-
winning economist, helped develop the Fiscal Illusion hypothesis. It's obvious,
he said, "borrowing allows spending to be made that will yield immediate
political payoffs without the incurring of any immediate political cost." In
their book Democracy in Deficit (1977), Buchanan and Richard E. Wagner suggest
that the complicated nature of the U.S. tax system causes fiscal illusion and
results in greater public expenditure than would be the case in an idealized
system in which everyone is aware in detail of what their share of the costs of
government is. Empirical evidence shows that Starve the Beast may be
counterproductive, with lower taxes actually corresponding to higher spending.
An October 2007 study by Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer of the National
Bureau of Economic Research found: "[...] no support for the hypothesis that
tax cuts restrain government spending; indeed, findings suggest that tax cuts
may actually increase spending. The results also indicate that the main effect
of tax cuts on the government budget is to induce subsequent legislated tax
increases." William Niskanen, chairman emeritus of the libertarian Cato
Institute, criticized “starve the beast.” If deficits finance 20% of
government spending, then citizens perceive government services as discounted.
Services that are popular at 20% off the listed price would be less popular at
full price. He hypothesized that higher revenues could constrain spending, and
found strong statistical support for that conjecture based on data from 1981 to
2005. Another Cato researcher, Michael New, tested Niskanen’s model in
different time periods and using a more restrictive definition of spending
(non-defense discretionary spending) and arrived at a similar conclusion.
Professor Leonard E. Berman of Syracuse University testified to a U.S. Senate
committee in July 2010 that: "My guess is that if President Bush had announced
a new war surtax to pay for Iraq or an increase in the Medicare payroll tax
rate to pay for the prescription drug benefit, both initiatives would have been
less popular. Given that the prescription drug benefit only passed Congress by
one vote after an extraordinary amount of arm-twisting, it seems unlikely that
it would have passed at all if accompanied by a tax increase. Starve the beast
doesn’t work." Economist Paul Krugman summarized as: "Rather than proposing
unpopular spending cuts, Republicans would push through popular tax cuts, with
the deliberate intention of worsening the government’s fiscal position.
Spending cuts could then be sold as a necessity rather than a choice, the only
way to eliminate an unsustainable budget deficit." He wrote that the "...beast
is starving, as planned..." and that "Republicans insist that the deficit must
be eliminated, but they’re not willing either to raise taxes or to support
cuts in any major government programs. And they’re not willing to participate
in serious bipartisan discussions, either, because that might force them to
explain their plan—and there isn’t any plan, except to regain power."
Historian Bruce Bartlett, former domestic policy adviser to President Ronald
Reagan, has called Starve the Beast "the most pernicious fiscal doctrine in
history", and blames it for the increase in US government debt since the 1980s.
Political advocacy. Former U.S. vice-presidential candidate Sarah Palin
expressly advocates the policy: "please , starve the beast, don't perpetuate
the problem, don't fund the largesse, we need to cut taxes." U.S. Senator Jon
Kyl (R-AZ), a member of the Senate Finance Committee, states "you should never
have to offset the cost of a deliberate decision to reduce tax rates on
Americans." Activist Grover Norquist is a well-known proponent of the strategy
and has famously said, "My goal is to cut government in half in twenty-five
years, to get it down to the size where we can drown it in the bathtub." "Feed
the Beast". A related idea known as "Feed the Beast", refers to increasing
taxes for the purported purpose of balancing the budget only to make the
government spend those inflows. Economists Stephen Moore and Richard Vedder
have written in the "Wall Street Journal" that every new dollar of new taxes
leads to more than one dollar of new spending according to their research.
Their conclusions have been disputed by economist and writer Bruce Bartlett in
"The Fiscal Times", who stated that tax increases in the early 1990s helped
contribute to more austere budgets in the late 1990s.
