State of nature The state of nature is a term in political philosophy used in
social contract theories to describe the hypothetical condition that preceded
governments. There must have been a time before government, and so the question
is how legitimate government could emerge from such a starting position, and
what are the hypothetical reasons for entering a state of society by
establishing a government. In some versions of social contract theory, there
are no rights in the state of nature, only freedoms, and it is the contract
that creates rights and obligations. In other versions the opposite occurs: the
contract imposes restrictions upon individuals that curtail their natural
rights. The time-period before the establishment of government, which political
philosophers call the "state of nature," however, is regarded in the modern
scientific era not only as hypothetical but actual. Societies existing before
or without a political state are currently studied in such diverse fields as
paleolithic history, archaeology, cultural anthropology, social anthropology,
and ethnology, which investigate the social and power-related structures of
indigenous and uncontacted peoples living in tribal communities. History.
Thomas Aquinas' theology. The term "state of nature" appears in the writings of
Thomas Aquinas (born c. 1225) (see "De Veritate", Question 19, Article 1,
Answer 13). Aside from its influence upon later Political Philosophy, the use
of the term in Aquinas is also of key importance for the development of the
Catholic "Natural Law" Theological Tradition; its biblical theological
provenance goes back to a pregnant statement of the Apostle Paul in his Letter
to the Romans (Romans 2:12-16). For Paul, in Romans chapter 2, the "natural
law" is contrasted with the Mosaic Law posited on Mount Sinai in that the
Jewish Nation possessed the latter while the Gentile Nations lacked the Law of
Moses but possessed the former in virtue of knowing (some of its central
commandments) and obeying it (partially) "by nature." From this theological
interpretation (one now controversial among leading Paulinists, i.e., it is
disputed that Paul actually intended all of the later machinery of the "Natural
Law" tradition) it was but a small step to speak of this perceived natural
condition of the Gentile Nations (i.e., their "natural" nomological condition)
as a "state of nature." However, for Aquinas, following Aristotle, the State of
Nature is not logically (or temporally) prior to the politically constituted
community but is that community, i.e. for both Aristotle and Aquinas the
political state is natural for human beings (see "Encyclopedia of Political
Theory", by Mark Bevin, s.v., "Thomism, "Natural Law"). In later Political
Philosophy (e.g., Hobbes and Locke) the (hypothetical if not temporal) positing
of the priority of the State of Nature will become a standard move. Aquinas
also employed the terms "primitive state" ("statum primi") and "state of
innocence" ("statu innocentiae") (see "Summa Theologica", Part I, Question 97,
"Of the Preservation of the Individual in the Primitive State"). Thomas Hobbes.
The pure state of nature or "the natural condition of mankind" was deduced by
the 17th century English philosopher Thomas Hobbes, in "Leviathan" and in his
earlier work "On the Citizen". Hobbes argued that all humans are by nature
equal in faculties of body and mind (i.e. no "natural" inequalities are so
great as to give anyone a "claim" to an exclusive "benefit"). From this
equality and other causes in human nature, everyone is naturally willing to
fight one another: so that "during the time men live without a common power to
keep them all in awe, they are in that condition which is called war; and such
a war as is of every man against every man". In this state every person has a
natural right or liberty to do anything one thinks necessary for preserving
one's own life; and life is "solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short"
("Leviathan," Chapters XIII-XIV). Hobbes described this natural condition with
the Latin phrase "bellum omnium contra omnes" (meaning war of all against all),
in his work "De Cive". Within the state of nature there is neither private
property nor injustice since there is no law, except for certain natural
precepts discovered by reason ("laws of nature"): the first of which is "that
every man ought to endeavour peace, as far as he has hope of obtaining it"
(Leviathan, Ch. XIV); and the second is "that a man be willing, when others are
so too, as far forth as for peace and defence of himself he shall think it
necessary, to lay down this right to all things; and be contented with so much
liberty against other men as he would allow other men against himself" ("loc.
cit."). From here Hobbes develops the way out of the state of nature into
political society and government, by mutual contracts. According to Hobbes the
state of nature exists at all times among independent countries, over whom
there is no law except for those same precepts or laws of nature ("Leviathan",
Chapters XIII, XXX end). His view of the state of nature helped to serve as a
basis for theories of international law and realism. Locke's view on the state
of nature. John Locke considers the state of nature in his "Second Treatise on
Civil Government" written around the time of the Exclusion Crisis in England
during the 1680s. For Locke, in the state of nature all men are free "to order
their actions, and dispose of their possessions and persons, as they think fit,
within the bounds of the law of nature." (2nd Tr., §4). "The state of Nature
has a law of Nature to govern it", and that law is Reason. Locke believes that
reason teaches that "no one ought to harm another in his life, liberty, and or
property"; and that transgressions of this may be punished. This view of the
state of nature is partly deduced from Christian belief (unlike Hobbes, whose
philosophy is not dependent upon any prior theology). Although it may be
natural to assume that Locke was responding to Hobbes, Locke never refers to
Hobbes by name, and may instead have been responding to other writers of the
day, like Robert Filmer. In fact, Locke's First Treatise is entirely a response
to Filmer's Patriarcha, and takes a step by step method to refuting Filmer's
theory set out in Patriarcha. The conservative party at the time had rallied
behind Filmer's Patriarcha, whereas the Whigs, scared of another prosecution of
Anglicans and Protestants, rallied behind the theory set out by Locke in his
Two Treatises of Government; as it gives a clear theory as to why you should be
allowed to overthrow a monarchy who abuses the trust set in it by the people.
Montesquieu. Montesquieu makes use of the concept of the State of Nature in his
The Spirit of the Laws first printed in 1748. Rousseau. Hobbes's view was
challenged in the eighteenth century by Jean-Jacques Rousseau, who claimed that
Hobbes was taking socialized people and simply imagining them living outside of
the society in which they were raised. He affirmed instead that people were
neither good nor bad. In Rousseau's state of nature, people did not know each
other enough, and they did have normal values. The modern society is blamed for
blemishing the pure people. Hume's theory. David Hume offers in "A Treatise of
Human Nature" (1739), that human beings are naturally social: "’Tis utterly
impossible for men to remain any considerable time in that savage condition,
which precedes society; but that his very first state and situation may justly
be esteem’d social. This, however, hinders not, but that philosophers may, if
they please, extend their reasoning to the suppos’d state of nature; provided
they allow it to be a mere philosophical fiction, which never had, and never
cou’d have any reality." (Book III, Part II, Section II: "Of the Origin of
Justice and Property." Hume's ideas about human nature expressed in the
"Treatise" suggest that he would be happy with neither Hobbes's nor his
contemporary Rousseau's thought-experiments. He explicitly derides as
incredible the hypothetical humanity described in Hobbes's "Leviathan" (Book
II, Part III, Section I: "Of Liberty and Necessity"). And he argues in "Of the
Origin of Justice and Property" that if mankind were universally benevolent, we
would not hold Justice to be a virtue: "’tis only from the selfishness and
confin’d generosity of men, along with the scanty provision nature has made
for his wants, that justice derives its 20th century. John Rawls used what
amounted to an artificial state of nature. To develop his theory of Justice,
Rawls places everyone in the original position. The original position is a
hypothetical state of nature used as a thought experiment to develop Rawls'
theory of justice. People in the original position have no society and are
under a veil of ignorance that prevents them from knowing how they may benefit
from society. They lack foreknowledge of their intelligence, wealth, or
abilities. Rawls reasons that people in the original position would want a
society where they had their basic liberties protected and where they had some
economic guarantees as well. If society were to be constructed from scratch
through a social agreement between individuals, these principles would be the
expected basis of such an agreement. Thus, these principles should form the
basis of real, modern societies since everyone should consent to them if
society were organized from scratch in fair agreements. Rawls's Harvard
colleague Robert Nozick countered the liberal "A Theory of Justice" with a
libertarian "Anarchy, State, and Utopia", also grounded in the state of nature
tradition. Nozick argued that a minimalist state of property rights and basic
law enforcement would develop out of a state of nature without violating
anyone's rights or using force. Mutual agreements among individuals rather than
social contract would lead to this minimal state. Between nations. In Hobbes's
view, once a civil government is instituted, the state of nature has
disappeared between individuals because of the civil power which exists to
enforce contracts and the laws of nature generally. Between nations, however,
no such power exists and therefore nations have the same rights to preserve
themselves - including making war - as individuals possessed. Such a conclusion
led some writers to the idea of an association of nations or worldwide civil
society. Among them there were Immanuel Kant with his work on perpetual peace.
Rawls also examines the state of nature between nations. In his work the "Law
of Peoples", Rawls applies a modified version of his original position thought
experiment to international relationships. Rawls says that people, not states,
form the basic unit that should be examined. States should be encouraged to
follow the principles from Rawls's earlier "Theory of Justice". Democracy seems
like it would be the most logical means of accomplishing these goals, but
benign non-democracies should be seen as acceptable at the international stage.
Rawls develops eight principles for how people should act on an international
stage.
