Stem cell controversy The stem cell controversy is the ethical debate primarily
concerning the creation, treatment, and destruction of human embryos incident
to research involving embryonic stem cells. Not all stem cell research involves
the creation, use, or destruction of human embryos. For example, adult stem
cells, amniotic stem cells and induced pluripotent stem cells do not involve
human embryos at all. Background. Since stem cells have the ability to
differentiate into any type of cell, they offer something in the development of
medical treatments for a wide range of conditions. Treatments that have been
proposed include treatment for physical trauma, degenerative conditions, and
genetic diseases (in combination with gene therapy). Yet further treatments
using stem cells could potentially be developed thanks to their ability to
repair extensive tissue damage. Great levels of success and potential have been
shown from research using adult stem cells. In early 2009, the FDA approved the
first human clinical trials using embryonic stem cells. Embryonic stem cells
are pluripotent, and thus can become any other cell type excluding the
placenta. Adult stem cells, however, are generally limited to differentiating
into different cell types of their tissue of origin. However, some evidence
suggests that adult stem cell plasticity may exist, increasing the number of
cell types a given adult stem cell can become. In addition, embryonic stem
cells are considered more useful for nervous system therapies, because
researchers have struggled to identify and isolate neural progenitors from
adult tissues. Embryonic stem cells, however, might be rejected by the immune
system - a problem which wouldn't occur if the patient received his or her own
stem cells. Some stem cell researchers are working to develop techniques of
isolating stem cells that are as potent as embryonic stem cells, but do not
require a human embryo. Some believe that human skin cells can be coaxed to
"de-differentiate" and revert to an embryonic state. Researchers at Harvard
University, led by Kevin Eggan, have attempted to transfer the nucleus of a
somatic cell into an existing embryonic stem cell, thus creating a new stem
cell line. Another study published in August 2006 also indicates that
differentiated cells can be reprogrammed to an embryonic-like state by
introducing four specific factors, resulting in induced pluripotent stem cells.
Researchers at Advanced Cell Technology, led by Robert Lanza, reported the
successful derivation of a stem cell line using a process similar to
preimplantation genetic diagnosis, in which a single blastomere is extracted
from a blastocyst. At the 2007 meeting of the International Society for Stem
Cell Research (ISSCR), Lanza announced that his team had succeeded in producing
three new stem cell lines without destroying the parent embryos. "These are the
first human embryonic cell lines in existence that didn't result from the
destruction of an embryo." Lanza is currently in discussions with the National
Institutes of Health (NIH) to determine whether the new technique sidesteps
U.S. restrictions on federal funding for ES cell research. Anthony Atala of
Wake Forest University says that the fluid surrounding the fetus has been found
to contain stem cells that, when utilized correctly, "can be differentiated
towards cell types such as fat, bone, muscle, blood vessel, nerve and liver
cells". The extraction of this fluid is not thought to harm the fetus in any
way. He hopes "that these cells will provide a valuable resource for tissue
repair and for engineered organs as well". Viewpoints. The status of the human
embryo and human embryonic stem cell research is a controversial issue as, with
the present state of technology, the creation of a human embryonic stem cell
line requires the destruction of a human embryo. Stem cell debates have
motivated and reinvigorated the pro-life movement, whose members are concerned
with the rights and status of the embryo as an early-aged human life. They can
believe that embryonic stem cell research instrumentalizes and violates the
sanctity of life and some also view it as tantamount to murder. The fundamental
assertion of those who oppose embryonic stem cell research is the belief that
human life is inviolable, combined with the belief that human life begins when
a sperm cell fertilizes an egg cell to form a single cell. A portion of stem
cell researchers use embryos that were created but not used in in vitro
fertility treatments to derive new stem cell lines. Most of these embryos are
to be destroyed, or stored for long periods of time, long past their viable
storage life. In the United States alone, there have been estimates of at least
400,000 such embryos. See also Embryo donation. Medical researchers widely
submit that stem cell research has the potential to dramatically alter
approaches to understanding and treating diseases, and to alleviate suffering.
In the future, most medical researchers anticipate being able to use
technologies derived from stem cell research to treat a variety of diseases and
impairments. Spinal cord injuries and Parkinson's disease are two examples that
have been championed by high-profile media personalities (for instance,
Christopher Reeve and Michael J. Fox, who have lived with these conditions,
respectively). The anticipated medical benefits of stem cell research add
urgency to the debates, which has been appealed to by proponents of embryonic
stem cell research.  In 2006, researchers at Advanced Cell Technology of
Worcester, Massachusetts, succeeded in obtaining stem cells from mouse embryos
without destroying the embryos. If this technique and its reliability are
improved, it would alleviate some of the ethical concerns related to embryonic
stem cell research. Another technique announced in 2007 may also defuse the
longstanding debate and controversy. Research teams in the United States and
Japan have developed a simple and cost effective method of reprogramming human
skin cells to function much like embryonic stem cells by introducing artificial
viruses. While extracting and cloning stem cells is complex and extremely
expensive, the newly discovered method of reprogramming cells is much cheaper.
However, the technique may disrupt the DNA in the new stem cells, resulting in
damaged and cancerous tissue. More research will be required before non-
cancerous stem cells can be created. Update article to include 2009/2010
current stem cell usages in clinical trials. The planned treatment trials will
focus on the effects of oral lithium on neurological function in people with
chronic spinal cord injury and those that have received umbilical cord blood
mononuclear cell transplants to the spinal cord. The interest in these two
treatments derives from recent reports indicating that umbilical cord blood
stem cells may be beneficial for spinal cord injury and that lithium may
promote regeneration and recovery of function after spinal cord injury. Both
lithium and umbilical cord blood are widely available therapies that have long
been used to treat diseases in humans. Endorsement. Superiority. This is
usually presented as a counter-argument to using adult stem cells as an
alternative that doesn't involve embryonic destruction. Objection. "Better
alternatives". This argument is used by opponents of embryonic destruction as
well as researchers specializing in adult stem cell research. Pro-life
supporters often claim that the use of adult stem cells from sources such as
umbilical cord blood has consistently produced more promising results than the
use of embryonic stem cells. Furthermore, adult stem cell research may be able
to make greater advances if less money and resources were channeled into
embryonic stem cell research. Embryonic stem cells have never produced
therapies (to date, adult stem cells have been used in treatment). Moreover,
there have been many advances in adult stem cell research, including a recent
study where pluripotent adult stem cells were manufactured from differentiated
fibroblast by the addition of specific transcription factors. Newly created
stem cells were developed into an embryo and were integrated into newborn mouse
tissues, analogous to the properties of embryonic stem cells. This argument
remains hotly debated on both sides. Those critical of embryonic stem cell
research point to a current lack of practical treatments, while supporters
argue that advances will come with more time and that breakthroughs cannot be
predicted. Ethical theories. The main ethical theories used by opponents and
supporters in this controversy are consequentialism (utilitarianism) and
deontological ethics. Consequentialism is the ethical theory that assess the
rightness or wrongness of a certain action based on the desirability of the
results or the consequences of the action. In this theory good actions are
actions that brings happiness or pleasure to the largest number of people.
Unlike consequentialism, deontological ethics primary concern is the action in
its self. The word Deon is a Greek word that means duty or obligation. This
ethical theory judges the wrongness or rightness of an action based on the
conformity of that action with certain norms or principals. Immanuel Kant, a
German philosopher expressed his deontological theory using the categorical
imperatives. These categorical imperatives are principles that serve to guide
the conduct of people. One of Kant’s categorical imperatives says, “always
treat persons as ends in themselves and not merely as means to some other
end.” If we give to the human embryo the moral status of a person, then under
this principle it will be wrong to destroy the human embryo to save the lives
of others. Stated views of groups. Government policy stances. Europe. Austria,
France, Germany, and Ireland do not allow the production of embryonic stem cell
lines; but the creation of embryonic stem cell lines is permitted in Finland,
Greece, the Netherlands, Sweden, Italy and the United Kingdom. United States.
Origins. In 1973, Roe v. Wade legalized abortion in the United States. Five
years later, the first successful human "in vitro" fertilization resulted in
the birth of Louise Brown in England. These developments prompted the federal
government to create regulations barring the use of federal funds for research
that experimented on human embryos.), the Clinton Administration had decided
that it would be permissible under the Dickey Amendment to fund hESC research
as long as such research did not itself directly cause the destruction of an
embryo. Therefore, HHS issued its proposed regulation concerning hESC funding
in 2001. Enactment of the new guidelines was delayed by the incoming George W.
Bush administration which decided to reconsider the issue. President Bush
announced, on August 9, 2001 that federal funds, for the first time, would be
made available for hESC research. However, the Bush Administration chose to
limit taxpayer funding to then-existing hESC cell lines, thereby limiting
federal funding to research in which "the life-and-death decision has already
been made". The Bush Administration's guidelines differ from the Clinton
Administration guidelines which did not distinguish between currently existing
and not-yet-existing hESC. Both the Bush and Clinton guidelines agree that the
federal government should not fund hESC research that directly destroys
embryos. Neither Congress nor any administration has ever prohibited private
funding of embryonic research. Public and private funding of research on adult
and cord blood stem cells is unrestricted. U.S. Congressional response. In
April 2004, 206 out of 500 members of Congress signed a letter urging President
Bush to expand federal funding of embryonic stem cell research beyond what Bush
had already supported. In May 2005, the House of Representatives voted 238-194
to loosen the limitations on federally funded embryonic stem-cell research —
by allowing government-funded research on surplus frozen embryos from in vitro
fertilization clinics to be used for stem cell research with the permission of
donors — despite Bush's promise to veto the bill if passed. On July 29, 2005,
Senate Majority Leader William H. Frist (R-TN), announced that he too favored
loosening restrictions on federal funding of embryonic stem cell research. On
July 18, 2006, the Senate passed three different bills concerning stem cell
research. The Senate passed the first bill (Stem Cell Research Enhancement
Act), 63-37, which would have made it legal for the Federal government to spend
Federal money on embryonic stem cell research that uses embryos left over from
"in vitro" fertilization procedures. On July 19, 2006 President Bush vetoed
this bill. The second bill makes it illegal to create, grow, and abort fetuses
for research purposes. The third bill would encourage research that would
isolate pluripotent, i.e., embryonic-like, stem cells without the destruction
of human embryos. In 2005 and 2007, Congressman Ron Paul introduced the Cures
Can Be Found Act, with 10 cosponsors. With an income tax credit, the bill
favors research upon non embryonic stem cells obtained from placentas,
umbilical cord blood, amniotic fluid, humans after birth, or unborn human
offspring who died of natural causes; the bill was referred to committee. Paul
argued that hESC research is outside of federal jurisdiction either to ban or
to subsidize. Bush vetoed another bill, the Stem Cell Research Enhancement Act
of 2007, which would have amended the Public Health Service Act to provide for
human embryonic stem cell research. The bill passed the Senate on April 11 by a
vote of 63-34, then passed the House on June 7 by a vote of 247-176. President
Bush vetoed the bill on July 19, 2007. On March 9, 2009, President Obama
removed the restriction on federal funding for newer stem cell lines. Two days
after Obama removed the restriction, the President then signed the Omnibus
Appropriations Act of 2009, which still contained the long-standing Dickey-
Wicker provision which bans federal funding of "research in which a human
embryo or embryos are destroyed, discarded, or knowingly subjected to risk of
injury or death;" the Congressional provision effectively prevents federal
funding being used to create new stem cell lines by many of the known methods.
So, while scientists might not be free to create new lines with federal
funding, President Obama's policy allows the potential of applying for such
funding into research involving the hundreds of existing stem cell lines as
well as any further lines created using private funds or state-level funding.
The ability to apply for federal funding for stem cell lines created in the
private sector is a significant expansion of options over the limits imposed by
President Bush, who restricted funding to the 21 viable stem cell lines that
were created before he announced his decision in 2001. The ethical concerns
raised during Clinton's time in office continue to restrict hESC research and
dozens of stem cell lines have been excluded from funding, now by judgment of
an administrative office rather than Presidential or legislative discretion.
Funding. In 2005 the NIH funded $607 million worth of stem cell research, of
which $39 million was specifically used for hESC. Sigrid Fry-Revere has argued
that private organizations, not the federal government, should provide funding
for stem-cell research, so that shifts in public opinion and government policy
would not bring valuable scientific research to a grinding halt. In 2005 the
State of California took out 3 billion dollars in bond loans to fund embryonic
stem cell research in that state. Asia. China has one of the most permissive
human embryonic stem cell policies in the world. In the absence of a public
controversy, human embryo stem cell research is supported by policies that
allow the use of human embryos and therapeutic cloning. Iran has banned
embryonic stem cell lines. Religious views. Christianity. Baptists. The
Southern Baptist Convention opposes human embryonic stem cell research on the
grounds that "Bible teaches that human beings are made in the image and
likeness of God (Gen. 1:27; 9:6) and protectable human life begins at
fertilization." However, it supports adult stem cell research as it does "not
require the destruction of embryos." Catholicism. In regards, to embryonic stem
cell research, the Catholic Church affirms that "the killing of innocent human
creatures, even if carried out to help others, constitutes an absolutely
unacceptable act." The deliberate destruction of a human embryo is incompatible
with Roman Catholic doctrine, according to which, Pontifical Academy for Life
has stated that human blastocysts are inherently valuable and should not be
voluntarily destroyed as they are "from the moment of the union of the gametes"
human subjects with well defined identities. The Church supports research that
involves stem cells from adult tissues and the umbilical cord, as it "involves
no harm to human beings at any state of development." Methodism. In regards, to
embryonic stem cell research, the United Methodist Church stands in "opposition
to the creation of embryos for the sake of research" as "a human embryo, even
at its earliest stages, commands our reverence." However, it supports adult
stem cell research, stating that there are "few moral questions" raised by this
issue. Pentecostalism. The Assemblies of God opposes "the practice of
cultivating stem cells from the tissue of aborted fetuses" because it
"perpetuates the evil of abortion and should be prohibited." The Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. “The First Presidency of The Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has not taken a position regarding the use of
embryonic stem cells for research purposes. The absence of a position should
not be interpreted as support for or opposition to any other statement made by
Church members, whether they are for or against embryonic stem cell
research.” Islam. Thus, Islam’s obligation towards knowledge coupled with
its tradition towards not allowing surrogate parenting or embryo adoption,
leads many Islamic scholars to believe that the Qur'an can be used to support
stem cell research. Judaism. According to Rabbi Levi Yitschak Halperin of the
Institute for Science and Jewish Law in Jerusalem, embryonic stem cell research
is permitted so long as it has not been implanted in the womb. Not only is it
permitted, but research is encouraged, rather than wasting it. Similarly, the
sole Jewish majority state, Israel, permits research on embryonic stem cells.
