Stephanie Cutter Stephanie Cutter (born October 22, 1968) is a political
consultant who currently serves as Deputy Campaign Manager for President Barack
Obama's 2012 reelection campaign. She has previously worked in campaign and
communications roles for other Democrats including Ted Kennedy, John Kerry and
Michelle Obama. "The New York Times" described her as "a popular but polarizing
face of (Obama's) campaign", and a "soldier who says the things the candidate
can’t (or won’t) say." Biography. Cutter was born in Taunton, Massachusetts
and raised in nearby Raynham, Massachusetts. She graduated from Bridgewater-
Raynham Regional High School in 1986. Her mother is a school teacher and she
has a brother who served in Afghanistan. She graduated from Smith College and
Georgetown Law School. In the 1990s, she worked as a junior aide to Mario Cuomo
and also worked for the Environmental Protection Agency. She worked for former
President Bill Clinton as Deputy Communications Director at the White House
during his administration "to help restore Mr. Clinton’s image in the
aftermath of (his) impeachment and Monica Lewinsky", and as Associate
Administrator for Communications at the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
Beginning in 2001, she served as Communications Director for Senator Ted
Kennedy. In July 2003 was named Communications Director for the Democratic
National Committee. In November 2003, she was named communications director for
the John Kerry campaign, at Kennedy's recommendation. During that campaign, she
was criticized for having a surly and difficult personality and was often
scapegoated for Kerry's loss. However, campaign workers noted it was a chaotic
campaign with plenty of blame to go around. Cutter has been wrongly blamed for
the Kerry campaign's failure to respond to the Swift Boat controversy, when, in
fact, she argued for a rapid and aggressive response. Kerry considered the
criticism of her unfair and praised her work. After the Kerry campaign, Cutter
returned to work for Kennedy. In June 2008 Cutter was appointed Chief of Staff
to Michelle Obama for the 2008 Presidential general election campaign.
Stephanie Cutter and Michelle Obama immediately clicked and Cutter is widely
credited with building Obama's popularity with the public, particularly her
Let's Move! health initiative. She is credited with enlisting Republican Mike
Huckabee to the program, to help prevent criticism from conservatives. She
served as the Chief Spokesperson for the Obama-Biden Transition Project. She
served in the Treasury Department as Timothy Geithner's counselor where "she
protected Geithner’s fragile reputation and tried to spin unpopular policies
like the Troubled Asset Relief Program and the A.I.G. bailout." In May 2009,
Cutter was appointed to serve as adviser to President Obama in the Supreme
Court nominations. Later that year, "GQ" Magazine named Cutter one of the 50
most powerful people in Washington. In 2010, Cutter was named Assistant to the
President for Special Projects, charged with managing communications and
outreach strategy for the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. In 2011,
Cutter was named Deputy Senior Advisor to President Barack Obama. In September
2011, the White House announced Cutter would leave her position as Deputy
Senior Advisor to serve as deputy campaign manager for Obama for America. She
has appeared in numerous campaign videos and ads for Obama's campaign, as well
as a guest in TV appearances. During the 2012 campaign, Steve Schmidt, a
Republican strategist, stated that Cutter is "arguably the strongest player on
either side out there now."
