Stock exchange A stock exchange is a form of exchange which provides services
for stock brokers and traders to trade stocks, bonds, and other securities.
Stock exchanges also provide facilities for issue and redemption of securities
and other financial instruments, and capital events including the payment of
income and dividends. Securities traded on a stock exchange include shares
issued by companies, unit trusts, derivatives, pooled investment products and
bonds. To be able to trade a security on a certain stock exchange, it must be
listed there. Usually, there is a central location at least for record keeping,
but trade is increasingly less linked to such a physical place, as modern
markets are electronic networks, which gives them advantages of increased speed
and reduced cost of transactions. Trade on an exchange is by members only. The
initial offering of stocks and bonds to investors is by definition done in the
primary market and subsequent trading is done in the secondary market. A stock
exchange is often the most important component of a stock market. Supply and
demand in stock markets are driven by various factors that, as in all free
markets, affect the price of stocks (see stock valuation). There is usually no
compulsion to issue stock via the stock exchange itself, nor must stock be
subsequently traded on the exchange. Such trading is said to be "off exchange"
or over-the-counter. This is the usual way that derivatives and bonds are
traded. Increasingly, stock exchanges are part of a global market for
securities. History. Securities markets took centuries to develop. The idea of
debt dates back to the ancient world, as evidenced for example by ancient
Mesopotamian clay tablets recording interest-bearing loans. There is little
consensus among scholars as to when corporate stock was first traded. Some see
the key event as the Dutch East India Company's founding in 1602, while others
point to earlier developments. Economist Ulrike Malmendier of the University of
California at Berkeley argues that a share market existed as far back as
ancient Rome. In the Roman Republic, which existed for centuries before the
Empire was founded, there were "societates publicanorum", organizations of
contractors or leaseholders who performed temple-building and other services
for the government. One such service was the feeding of geese on the Capitoline
Hill as a reward to the birds after their honking warned of a Gallic invasion
in 390 B.C. Participants in such organizations had "partes" or shares, a
concept mentioned various times by the statesman and orator Cicero. In one
speech, Cicero mentions "shares that had a very high price at the time." Such
evidence, in Malmendier's view, suggests the instruments were tradable, with
fluctuating values based on an organization's success. The "societas" declined
into obscurity in the time of the emperors, as most of their services were
taken over by direct agents of the state. Tradable bonds as a commonly used
type of security were a more recent innovation, spearheaded by the Italian
city-states of the late medieval and early Renaissance periods. In 1171, the
authorities of the Republic of Venice, concerned about their war-depleted
treasury, drew a forced loan from the citizenry. Such debt, known as
"prestiti", paid 5 percent interest per year and had an indefinite maturity
date. Initially regarded with suspicion, it came to be seen as a valuable
investment that could be bought and sold. The bond market had begun. From 1262
to 1379, Venice never missed an interest payment, solidifying the credibility
of the new instruments. Other Italian city-states such as Florence and Genoa
became bond issuers as well, often as a means of paying for warfare. Bonds were
traded widely in Italy and beyond, a business facilitated by bankers such as
the Medicis. War between Venice and Genoa resulted in suspension of "prestiti"
interest payments in the early 1380s, and when the market was restored, it was
at a lower interest rate. Venice's bonds traded at steep discounts for decades
thereafter. Other blows to financial stability resulted from the Hundred Years
War, which caused monarchs of France and England to default on debts to Italian
banks, and the Black Death, which ravaged much of Europe. Still, the idea of
debt as a tradable investment endured. As with bonds, the concept of stock
developed gradually. Some scholars place its origins as far back as ancient
Rome. Partnership agreements dividing ownership into shares date back at least
to the 13th century, again with Italian city-states in the vanguard. Such
arrangements, however, typically extended only to a handful of people and were
of limited duration, as with shipping partnerships that applied only to a
single sea voyage. The forefront of commercial innovation eventually shifted
from Italy to northern Europe. The Hanseatic League, an alliance of mercantile
cities such as Bruges and Antwerp, operated counting houses to expedite trade.
By the late 1500s, British merchants were experimenting with joint-stock
companies intended to operate on an ongoing basis; one such was the Muscovy
Company, which sought to wrest trade with Russia away from Hanseatic dominance.
The next big step was in Amsterdam. In 1602, the Dutch East India Company was
formed as a joint-stock company with shares that were readily tradable. The
stock market had begun. The Dutch East India Company, formed to build up the
spice trade, operated as a colonial ruler in what's now Indonesia and beyond, a
purview that included conducting military operations against recalcitrant
natives and competing colonial powers. Control of the company was held tightly
by its directors, with ordinary shareholders not having much influence on
management or even access to the company's accounting statements. However,
shareholders were rewarded well for their investment. The company paid an
average dividend of over 16 percent per year from 1602 to 1650. Financial
innovation in Amsterdam took many forms. In 1609, investors led by one Isaac Le
Maire formed history's first bear syndicate, but their coordinated trading had
only a modest impact in driving down share prices, which tended to be robust
throughout the 17th century. By the 1620s, the company was expanding its
securities issuance with the first use of corporate bonds. The Dutch West India
Company was formed in 1621, bringing a new issuer to the burgeoning securities
market. Amsterdam's growth as a financial center survived the tulip mania of
the 1630s, in which contracts for the delivery of flower bulbs soared wildly
and then crashed. New techniques and instruments proliferated for securities as
well as commodities, including options, repos and margin trading. Joseph de la
Vega, also known as Joseph Penso de la Vega and by other variations of his
name, was an Amsterdam trader from a Spanish Jewish family and a prolific
writer as well as a successful businessman in 17th-century Amsterdam. His 1688
book Confusion of Confusions explained the workings of the city's stock market.
It was the earliest book about stock trading, taking the form of a dialogue
between a merchant, a shareholder and a philosopher, the book described a
market that was sophisticated but also prone to excesses, and de la Vega
offered advice to his readers on such topics as the unpredictability of market
shifts and the importance of patience in investment. The year that de la Vega
published also brought an event that helped spread financial techniques and
talent from Amsterdam to London. This was the "glorious revolution," in which
Dutch ruler William of Orange also ascended to England's throne. William sought
to modernize England's finances to pay for its wars, and thus the kingdom's
first government bonds were issued in 1693 and the Bank of England was set up
the following year. Soon thereafter, English joint-stock companies began going
public. London's first stockbrokers, however, were barred from the old
commercial center known as the Royal Exchange, reportedly because of their rude
manners. Instead, the new trade was conducted from coffee houses along Exchange
Alley. By 1698, a broker named John Castaing, operating out of Jonathan's
Coffee House, was posting regular lists of stock and commodity prices. Those
lists mark the beginning of the London Stock Exchange. One of history's
greatest financial bubbles occurred in the next few decades. At the center of
it were the South Sea Company, set up in 1711 to conduct English trade with
South America, and the Mississippi Company, focused on commerce with France's
Louisiana colony and touted by transplanted Scottish financier John Law, who
was acting in effect as France's central banker. Investors snapped up shares in
both, and whatever else was available. In 1720, at the height of the mania,
there was even an offering of "a company for carrying out an undertaking of
great advantage, but nobody to know what it is." By the end of that same year,
share prices were collapsing, as it became clear that expectations of imminent
wealth from the Americas were overblown. In London, Parliament passed the
Bubble Act, which stated that only royally chartered companies could issue
public shares. In Paris, Law was stripped of office and fled the country. Stock
trading was more limited and subdued in subsequent decades. Yet the market
survived, and by the 1790s shares were being traded in the young United States.
On 8 February 1971, NASDAQ, the world's first electronic stock exchange,
started its operations. Role of stock exchanges. Raising capital for
businesses. The Stock Exchange provide companies with the facility to raise
capital for expansion through selling shares to the investing public. Common
forms of capital raising. Besides the borrowing capacity provided to an
individual or firm by the banking system, in the form of credit or a loan,
there are four common forms of capital raising used by companies and
entrepreneurs. Most of these available options, might be achieved, directly or
indirectly, involving a stock exchange. Going public. Capital intensive
companies, particularly high tech companies, always need to raise high volumes
of capital in their early stages. For this reason, the public market provided
by the stock exchanges, has been one of the most important funding sources for
many capital intensive startups. After the 1990s and early-2000s hi-tech listed
companies' boom and bust in the world's major stock exchanges, it has been much
more demanding for the high-tech entrepreneur to take his/her company public,
unless either the company already has products in the market and is generating
sales and earnings, or the company has completed advanced promising clinical
trials, earned potentially profitable patents or conducted market research
which demonstrated very positive outcomes. This is quite different from the
situation of the 1990s to early-2000s period, when a number of companies
(particularly Internet boom and biotechnology companies) went public in the
most prominent stock exchanges around the world, in the total absence of sales,
earnings and any well-documented promising outcome. Anyway, every year a number
of companies, including unknown highly speculative and financially
unpredictable hi-tech startups, are listed for the first time in all the major
stock exchanges - there are even specialized entry markets for this kind of
companies or stock indexes tracking their performance (examples include the
Alternext, CAC Small, SDAX, TecDAX, or most of the third market companies).
Limited partnerships. A number of companies have also raised significant
amounts of capital through R&D limited partnerships. Tax law changes that were
enacted in 1987 in the United States changed the tax deductibility of
investments in R&D limited partnerships. In order for a partnership to be of
interest to investors today, the cash on cash return must be high enough to
entice investors. As a result, R&D limited partnerships are not a viable means
of raising money for most companies, specially hi-tech startups. Venture
capital. A third usual source of capital for startup companies has been venture
capital. This source remains largely available today, but the maximum
statistical amount that the venture company firms in aggregate will invest in
any one company is not limitless (it was approximately $15 million in 2001 for
a biotechnology company). At those level, venture capital firms typically
become tapped-out because the financial risk to any one partnership becomes too
great. Corporate partners. A fourth alternative source of cash for a private
company is a corporate partner, usually an established multinational company,
which provides capital for the smaller company in return for marketing rights,
patent rights, or equity. Corporate partnerships have been used successfully in
a large number of cases. Mobilizing savings for investment. When people draw
their savings and invest in shares (through a IPO or the issuance of new
company shares of an already listed company), it usually leads to rational
allocation of resources because funds, which could have been consumed, or kept
in idle deposits with banks, are mobilized and redirected to help companies'
management boards finance their organizations. This may promote business
activity with benefits for several economic sectors such as agriculture,
commerce and industry, resulting in stronger economic growth and higher
productivity levels of firms. Sometimes it is very difficult for the stock
investor to determine whether or not the allocation of those funds is in good
faith and will be able to generate long-term company growth, without
examination of a company's internal auditing. Facilitating company growth.
Companies view acquisitions as an opportunity to expand product lines, increase
distribution channels, hedge against volatility, increase its market share, or
acquire other necessary business assets. A takeover bid or a merger agreement
through the stock market is one of the simplest and most common ways for a
company to grow by acquisition or fusion. Profit sharing. Both casual and
professional stock investors, as large as institutional investors or as small
as an ordinary middle class family, through dividends and stock price increases
that may result in capital gains, share in the wealth of profitable businesses.
Unprofitable and troubled businesses may result in capital losses for
shareholders. Corporate governance. By having a wide and varied scope of
owners, companies generally tend to improve management standards and efficiency
to satisfy the demands of these shareholders, and the more stringent rules for
public corporations imposed by public stock exchanges and the government.
Consequently, it is alleged that public companies (companies that are owned by
shareholders who are members of the general public and trade shares on public
exchanges) tend to have better management records than privately held companies
(those companies where shares are not publicly traded, often owned by the
company founders and/or their families and heirs, or otherwise by a small group
of investors). Despite this claim, some well-documented cases are known where
it is alleged that there has been considerable slippage in corporate governance
on the part of some public companies. The dot-com bubble in the late 1990s, and
the subprime mortgage crisis in 2007-08, are classical examples of corporate
mismanagement. Companies like Pets.com (2000), Enron Corporation (2001),
One.Tel (2001), Sunbeam (2001), Webvan (2001), Adelphia (2002), MCI WorldCom
(2002), Parmalat (2003), American International Group (2008), Bear Stearns
(2008), Lehman Brothers (2008), General Motors (2009) and Satyam Computer
Services (2009) were among the most widely scrutinized by the media. However,
when poor financial, ethical or managerial records are known by the stock
investors, the stock and the company tend to lose value. In the stock
exchanges, shareholders of underperforming firms are often penalized by
significant share price decline, and they tend as well to dismiss incompetent
management teams. Creating investment opportunities for small investors. As
opposed to other businesses that require huge capital outlay, investing in
shares is open to both the large and small stock investors because a person
buys the number of shares they can afford. Therefore the Stock Exchange
provides the opportunity for small investors to own shares of the same
companies as large investors. Government capital-raising for development
projects. Governments at various levels may decide to borrow money to finance
infrastructure projects such as sewage and water treatment works or housing
estates by selling another category of securities known as bonds. These bonds
can be raised through the Stock Exchange whereby members of the public buy
them, thus loaning money to the government. The issuance of such bonds can
obviate the need, in the short term, to directly tax citizens to finance
development—though by securing such bonds with the full faith and credit of
the government instead of with collateral, the government must eventually tax
citizens or otherwise raise additional funds to make any regular coupon
payments and refund the principal when the bonds mature. Barometer of the
economy. At the stock exchange, share prices rise and fall depending, largely,
on market forces. Share prices tend to rise or remain stable when companies and
the economy in general show signs of stability and growth. An economic
recession, depression, or financial crisis could eventually lead to a stock
market crash. Therefore the movement of share prices and in general of the
stock indexes can be an indicator of the general trend in the economy.
Speculation. The stock exchanges are also fashionable places for speculation.
In a financial context, the terms "speculation" and "investment" are actually
quite specific. For instance, although the word "investment" is typically used,
in a general sense, to mean any act of placing money in a financial vehicle
with the intent of producing returns over a period of time, most ventured
money—including funds placed in the world's stock markets—is actually not
investment but speculation. Listing requirements. Listing requirements are the
set of conditions imposed by a given stock exchange upon companies that want to
be listed on that exchange. Such conditions sometimes include minimum number of
shares outstanding, minimum market capitalization, and minimum annual income.
Ownership. Stock exchanges originated as mutual organizations, owned by its
member stock brokers. There has been a recent trend for stock exchanges to
"demutualize", where the members sell their shares in an initial public
offering. In this way the mutual organization becomes a corporation, with
shares that are listed on a stock exchange. Examples are Australian Securities
Exchange (1998), Euronext (merged with New York Stock Exchange), NASDAQ (2002),
the New York Stock Exchange (2005), Bolsas y Mercados Españoles, and the São
Paulo Stock Exchange (2007). The Shenzhen and Shanghai stock exchanges can been
characterized as quasi-state institutions insofar as they were created by
government bodies in China and their leading personnel are directly appointed
by the China Securities Regulatory Commission. Other types of exchanges. In the
19th century, exchanges were opened to trade forward contracts on commodities.
Exchange traded forward contracts are called futures contracts. These
"commodity exchanges" later started offering future contracts on other
products, such as interest rates and shares, as well as options contracts. They
are now generally known as futures exchanges.
