Strategic Urban Planning The general objectives of strategic urban planning
(SUP) include clarifying which city model is desired and working towards that
goal, coordinating public and private efforts, channelling energy, adapting to
new circumstances and improving the living conditions of the citizens affected.
Strategic planning is a technique that has been applied to many facets of human
activity; we have only to mention Sun Tzu, Arthur Thomson or Henry Mintzberg;
however, the application of strategic planning to urban contexts, or cities,
regions and other metropolitan areas is a relatively recent development whose
beginnings were eminently practical and artistical: a mixture of thought,
techniques and art or expertise. Fifteen years of practice proved to be enough
time for the technique to spread and for the first “Meeting of American and
European cities for the Exchange of Experiences in Strategic Planning” to be
organized. Institutions sponsoring the meeting, held in Barcelona in 1993,
included the Inter-American Development Bank, the European Community Commission
and the Iberoamerican Cooperation Institute. The cities of Amsterdam, Lisbon,
Lille, Barcelona, Toronto and Santiago de Chile participated, among others. At
that meeting it was demonstrated, along with other relevant aspects, that if
cooperative processes are used in large cities in order to carry out strategic
planning processes, and if a reasonable degree of comprehension is reached
between the administration, businesses and an ample representation of social
agents, organizational synergies will develop that will eventually improve
resource management and citizens’ quality of life. History. Strategic Urban
Planning processes (SUP), also known as Urban Renewal Projects, began to appear
at the end of the 20th century. The city of San Francisco (U.S.A.) carried out
its process between 1982 and 1984. The main motivation behind starting
strategic urban planning processes was the attempt to adequately react to
problematic situations (mainly economic crisis or standstill). At the beginning
of the 21st century, this kind of organization is not reactive but proactive.
In the case of Spain, crisis situations are not the main causes of these
processes, rather they are motivated by the search for an improved level of
public-private cooperation, the wish to coordinate activity, continued
improvements, the wish to launch revitalization processes and even to follow
others . The initial determination needed to launch this type of processes
varies by region; in Spain, most processes are fronted by public entities,
approximately 50%, while a significant percentage has mixed public-private
leadership. Description of SUP processes. "The definition of a city project
that unifies diagnoses, specifies public and private actions and establishes a
coherent mobilization framework for the cooperation of urban social actors. A
participative process is a priority when defining contents, as this process
will be the basis for the viability of the objectives and actions proposed. The
result of the Strategic plan should not necessarily be the creation of
regulations or a government program (although its adoption by the State and
Local Government should mean the instigation of regulations, investment,
administrative measures, policy initiatives, etc) but rather a policy contract
between public institutions and civil society. For this reason, the process
following the approval of the plan and the monitoring and implementation of
measures or actions is just as or more important than the process of
elaboration and consensual approval." SUP is now considered a type of
Governance. Implementation of SUP processes. The social and economic importance
of these processes is quite relevant as they affect millions of people . In
Spain, [http://www.ebropolis.es/web/index.asp there are nearly one hundred
localities that use this methodology, affecting a total population of nearly 15
million people. Critical Comments on SUP processes. Sectors in the area of
civic participation, as well as planning professionals and political activists
have all expressed criticism of SUP processes. However, SUP processes include
aspects that favour selective participation, territorial organization and
coordination/cooperation between public and private sectors. On the other hand,
Strategic Urban Planning processes seem to be independent of political
ideologies (for example, the SUP processes in Barcelona Bilbao [http://
www.bm30.es/ and Valencia are carried out with mixed Government teams including
the following Spanish political formations: PSC-PSOE [http://
www.socialistes.cat/home/, PNV and PP [http://www.pp.es/ respectively) and can
produce a notable degree of stability in the majority behind the project.
Theoretical Development. Knowledge relating to strategic urban planning
processes is evolving in two complementary directions that can be denominated,
borrowing concepts from programming, as Bottom-Up and Top-down. Bottom-Up.
There are clear differences between what could be called the traditional
approach to Strategic planning and the emerging approach (Fernández Güell.
Strategic planning of cities). Of course, in 2006 there was a clear evolution
that attempted to adapt to changes, political sensitivities and even trends. In
any case, this is a line of thought and action that takes full advantage of the
experience of projects that have already been implemented. Top-Down. this line
of research seeks to further the design of a model that will determine the
factors related to the success of strategic planning processes in large cities
and metropolitan areas [http://alarcos.inf-cr.uclm.es/per/fruiz/audes5/
index.htm] :es:Aglomeraciones urbanas en la Unión Europea :es:Area
Metropolitana :es:Área metropolitana de Valencia. Within this branch of
research, which seeks a more general theory, two recent Doctoral Theses
mentioned in the bibliography can be consulted for further information. It
should be pointed out that a theory explaining Strategic Urban Planning in
Metropolitan Areas and/or Regions would involve furthering the consolidation of
Social Design :es:Diseño Social as a scientific study.
