Strategic complements In economics and game theory, the decisions of two or
more players are called strategic complements if they mutually reinforce one
another, and they are called strategic substitutes if they mutually offset one
another. These terms were originally coined by Bulow, Geanakoplos, and
Klemperer (1985). To see what is meant by 'reinforce' or 'offset', consider a
situation in which the players all have similar choices to make, as in the
paper of Bulow et al., where the players are all imperfectly competitive firms
that must each decide how much to produce. Then the production decisions are
strategic complements if an increase in the production of one firm increases
the marginal revenues of the others, because that gives the others an incentive
to produce more too. This tends to be the case if there are sufficiently strong
aggregate increasing returns to scale and/or the demand curves for the firms'
products have a sufficiently low own-price elasticity. On the other hand, the
production decisions are strategic substitutes if an increase in one firm's
output decreases the marginal revenues of the others, giving them an incentive
to produce less. According to Russell Cooper and Andrew John, strategic
complementarity is the basic property underlying examples of multiple
equilibria in coordination games. Calculus formulation. Mathematically,
consider a symmetric game with two players that each have payoff function
formula_1, where formula_2 represents the player's own decision, and formula_3
represents the decision of the other player. Assume formula_4 is increasing and
concave in the player's own strategy formula_2. Under these assumptions, the
two decisions are strategic complements if an increase in each player's own
decision formula_2 raises the marginal payoff formula_7 of the other player. In
other words, the decisions are strategic complements if the second derivative
formula_8 is positive for formula_9. Equivalently, this means that the function
formula_4 is supermodular. On the other hand, the decisions are strategic
substitutes if formula_8 is negative, that is, if formula_4 is submodular.
References.
