Strategic planning In many organizations, this is viewed as a process for
determining where an organization is going over the next year or—more
typically—3 to 5 years (long term), although some extend their vision to 20
years. Key components. The key components of 'strategic planning' include an
understanding of the firm's vision, mission, values and strategies. (Often a
"Vision Statement" and a "Mission Statement" may encapsulate the vision and
mission). Organizations sometimes summarize goals and objectives into a mission
statement and/or a vision statement. Others begin with a vision and mission and
use them to formulate goals and objectives. Many people mistake the vision
statement for the mission statement, and sometimes one is simply used as a
longer term version of the other. However they are meant to be quite different,
with the vision being a descriptive picture of a desired future state, and the
mission being a statement of a business rationale, applicable now as well as in
the future. The mission is therefore the means of successfully achieving the
vision. For an organisation's vision and mission to be effective, they must
become assimilated into the organization's culture. They should also be
assessed internally and externally. The internal assessment should focus on how
members inside the organization interpret their mission statement. The external
assessment — which includes all of the businesses stakeholders — is
valuable since it offers a different perspective. These discrepancies between
these two assessments can provide insight into their effectiveness. A vision
statement is a declaration of where you are headed—your future state - to
formulate a picture of what your organization's future makeup will be, and
where the organization is headed. Tools and approaches. Among the most useful
tools for strategic planning is SWOT analysis (Strengths, Weaknesses,
Opportunities, and Threats). The main objective of this tool is to analyze
internal strategic factors, strengths and weaknesses attributed to the
organization, and external factors beyond control of the organization such as
opportunities and threats. Situational analysis. When developing strategies,
analysis of the organization and its environment as it is at the moment and how
it may develop in the future, is important. The analysis has to be executed at
an internal level as well as an external level to identify all opportunities
and threats of the external environment as well as the strengths and weaknesses
of the organizations. It is rare to find all seven of these factors having
critical importance. It is also uncommon to find that the first two - markets
and competition - are not of critical importance. (Bradford "External Situation
- What to Consider") Analysis of the external environment normally focuses on
the customer. Management should be visionary in formulating customer strategy,
and should do so by thinking about market environment shifts, how these could
impact customer sets, and whether those customer sets are the ones the company
wishes to serve. Analysis of the competitive environment is also performed,
many times based on the framework suggested by Michael Porter. With regard to
market planning specifically, researchers have recommended a series of action
steps or guidelines in accordance to which market planners should plan. Goals,
objectives and targets. Strategic planning is a very important business
activity. It is also important in the public sector areas such as education. It
is practiced widely informally and formally. Strategic planning and decision
processes should end with objectives and a roadmap of ways to achieve them. The
goal of strategic planning mechanisms like formal planning is to increase
specificity in business operation, especially when long-term and high-stake
activities are involved. One of the core goals when drafting a strategic plan
is to develop it in a way that is easily translatable into action plans. Most
strategic plans address high level initiatives and overarching goals, but don't
get articulated (translated) into day-to-day projects and tasks that will be
required to achieve the plan. Terminology or word choice, as well as the level
a plan is written, are both examples of easy ways to fail at translating your
strategic plan in a way that makes sense and is executable to others. Often,
plans are filled with conceptual terms which don't tie into day-to-day
realities for the staff expected to carry out the plan. The following terms
have been used in strategic planning: desired end states, plans, policies,
goals, objectives, strategies, tactics and actions. Definitions vary, overlap
and fail to achieve clarity. The most common of these concepts are specific,
time bound statements of intended future results and general and continuing
statements of intended future results, which most models refer to as either
goals or objectives (sometimes interchangeably). One model of organizing
objectives uses hierarchies. The items listed above may be organized in a
hierarchy of means and ends and numbered as follows: Top Rank Objective (TRO),
Second Rank Objective, Third Rank Objective, etc. From any rank, the objective
in a lower rank answers to the question "How?" and the objective in a higher
rank answers to the question "Why?" The exception is the Top Rank Objective
(TRO): there is no answer to the "Why?" question. That is how the TRO is
defined. People typically have several goals at the same time. "Goal
congruency" refers to how well the goals combine with each other. Does goal A
appear compatible with goal B? Do they fit together to form a unified strategy?
"Goal hierarchy" consists of the nesting of one or more goals within other goal
(s). One approach recommends having short-term goals, medium-term goals, and
long-term goals. In this model, one can expect to attain short-term goals
fairly easily: they stand just slightly above one's reach. At the other
extreme, long-term goals appear very difficult, almost impossible to attain.
Strategic management jargon sometimes refers to "Big Hairy Audacious Goals"
(BHAGs) in this context. Using one goal as a stepping-stone to the next
involves goal sequencing. A person or group starts by attaining the easy short-
term goals, then steps up to the medium-term, then to the long-term goals. Goal
sequencing can create a "goal stairway". In an organizational setting, the
organization may co-ordinate goals so that they do not conflict with each
other. The goals of one part of the organization should mesh compatibly with
those of other parts of the organization. Business analysis techniques. Various
business analysis techniques can be used in strategic planning, including SWOT
analysis, PEST analysis, STEER analysis, and EPISTEL (see above).
