Street-level bureaucracy Street-level bureaucracy is the subset of a public
agency or government institution containing the individuals who carry out and
enforce the actions required by laws and public policies. Street-level
bureaucracy is accompanied by the idea that these individuals vary the extents
to which they enforce the rules and laws assigned to them. Street-level
bureaucrats. The concept of street-level bureaucracy was first coined by
Michael Lipsky in 1980, who argued that "policy implementation in the end comes
down to the people who actually implement it". He argued that state employees
such as police and social workers should be seen as part of the "policy-making
community" and as exercisers of political power. Examples of street-level
bureaucrats. Street-level bureaucrats include police officers, firefighters,
and other individuals, who on a daily basis interact with regular citizens and
provide the force behind the given rules and laws in their areas of expertise.
Problems with street-level bureaucracy. Lipsky identified several problems with
street-level bureaucracy, including "the problem of limited resources, the
continuous negotiation that is necessary in order to make it seem like one is
meeting targets, and the relations with (nonvoluntary) clients". However, some
commentators have challenged Lipsky's model. Tony Evans and John Harris." argue
that "the proliferation of rules and regulations should not automatically be
equated with greater control over professional discretion; paradoxically, more
rules may create more discretion." They also argue that the exercise of
professional discretion by street-level bureaucrats is not inherently "bad",
but can be seen as an important professional attribute. A 2003 American study,
conducted by Steven Maynard Moody of the University of Kansas, reiterated the
significance of street-level bureaucrats in the political process, asserting
that street-level workers "actually make policy choices rather than simply
implement the decisions of elected officials." They also claim, based on a
study of 48 street-level state employees in two states, that "workers' beliefs
about the people they interact with continually rub against policies and rules"
and that the prejudices of the street-level bureaucrats influence their
treatment of citizens. In 2007, Emil Mackey confirmed that even the Resident
Assistants in campus housing exercise their discretion to change policy at the
implementation level. Furthermore, these policy implementation changes
reflected the individual values of each street-level bureaucrat rather than the
will of policymakers. Therefore, this research not only confirmed previous
street-level bureaucrat research and literature, but also expanded it to
include the Higher Education policy environment.
