Student Global AIDS Campaign The Student Global AIDS Campaign (SGAC) is an
advocacy group with more than 85 chapters at high schools, colleges, and
universities across the United States. The group is committed to bringing an
end to HIV and AIDS in the U.S. and around the world, and uses a wide variety
of tactics to achieve its goals, including education on campuses, letter-
writing and calling campaigns to decision-makers, public demonstrations, media
work, and other activist tactics. The organization often describes its mission
in the short hand 'Fund the Fight, Treat the People, Drop the Debt, Stop the
Spread'. The fuller vision statement is: "We envision a world in which AIDS is
no longer a death sentence, in which economics and geography do not determine
access to life-saving drugs, and where every woman, man, and child has the
knowledge, means, and rights to protect her- or himself from infection." The
campaign has therefore pushed for access to antiretroviral drugs, the
elimination of third world debt, reform of global trade rules, and access to
condoms. History & founding. In February 2001, the Student Global AIDS Campaign
and its parent organization, Global Justice, were founded simultaneously by
students at Harvard and the Kennedy School of Government who saw the untapped
potential of students to advocate political and social change on global HIV and
AIDS and other issues of global justice. Global Justice became officially
incorporated as a 501 (c)(3) organization, with the Student Global AIDS
Campaign as its first campaign. The first conference was a New England regional
conference hosted by Harvard in the fall of 2001. That spring and the next fall
regional conferences were also held at Indiana University, the University of
Wisconsin–Madison, and Williams College. In the spring of 2003, SGAC
organized its first national conference (hosted by George Washington
University), which was attended by more than 500 students from around the
country. As SGAC’s chapter base has grown so has its capacity for effective
advocacy. SGAC’s first large rally was held in Boston in the spring of 2002
to demand that Senator John Kerry (who had declared himself the Senate AIDS
leader) significantly increase the amount of funding for the Global Fund in the
bill he was then writing. Structure. SGAC is a youth- and student-led
organization organized into chapters based at high schools or universities.
There is a national Steering Committee (SC) of students from across the
country. Elected by SGAC members for one-year terms, SC members deal with the
day to day operation of the campaign and fill roles ranging from media
coordination to outreach work. Decisions are made by consensus. Global Justice.
The Student Global AIDS Campaign's parent organization, Global Justice, is also
home to other student-led campaigns on global trade and child survival. Global
Justice also employs the staff that work on the Student Global AIDS Campaign,
including a full-time national organizer, a shared executive director, and
support/communications staff. Global Justice is governed by a board of
directors which has included such activists and intellectuals as Jeffrey Sachs,
Paul Farmer, and ACT UP co-founder Eric Sawyer, as well as students from each
of the group's campaigns. There is also an emerging alumni group of previous
leaders who have now graduated.
