Student voice Student voice describes the distinct perspectives and actions of
young people throughout schools focused on education. "Student voice is giving
students the ability to influence learning to include policies, programs,
contexts and principles." Student voice is the individual and collective
perspective and actions of students within the context of learning and
education. It is identified in schools as both a metaphorical practice and as a
pragmatic concern. Practice. Several typologies differentiate the practices
that identify as student voice. One identifies multiple roles for students
throughout the education system, including education planning, research,
teaching, evaluating, decision-making and advocacy. Administrative approaches.
Today student voice is seeing a resurgence of importance as a growing body of
literature increasingly identifies student voice as necessary throughout the
educational process. Areas where advocates encourage actively acknowledging
student voice include curriculum design and instructional methods, Educational
leadership and general school reform activities, including research and
evaluation. Curricular approaches. Specific types of activities that can
specifically engage student voice include teaching, education decision-making,
school planning, participatory action research, learning and teaching
evaluations, educational advocacy, and student advisories for principals and
superintendents Service learning. Engaging student voice is a primary objective
of service learning, which commonly seeks to entwine classroom learning
objectives with community service opportunities. Student voice is also present
in student government programs, experiential education activities, and other
forms of student-centered learning. Student as education decision-makers.
Engaging students as educational decision-makers is the practice of actively
teaching young people responsibility for their education by systematically
engaging them in making choices about learning, schooling, and the education
system in areas ranging from what affects them personally to what affects an
entire student body to what affects the entire school system. Choosing
curricula, calendar year planning, school building design, teacher hiring, and
many more issues are often seen as the duties of a school principal or
teachers. Today those roles are increasingly seen as avenues for student voice.
Students are joining boards of education at all levels, including local,
district, and state boards. Some education agencies engage students as staff in
programs where they make decisions about grant making, school assessment, and
other areas. Students are also participating in decision-making by establishing
and enforcing codes of conduct and in personal education decision-making, such
as choosing classes and deciding whether to attend school. Worldwide examples.
Education reform has long been the domain of parents, teachers, school
administrators and politicians. In some nations, however, there is a trend
beginning to encompass a much larger element of student participation in
scholastic affairs. Australia. The "Connect" journal, published in Melbourne,
features dozens of examples of student voice throughout education in its bi-
monthly publication. The Victorian Student Representative Council is the
umbrella or peak body of Student Councils in Victoria, Australia. It is
supported with funding from the Victorian Department of Education and Early
Childhood Development (DEECD) and auspiced by the Youth Affairs Council of
Victoria (YACVic). The VicSRC is an organisation run by secondary school
students, elected by their peers. Canada. Including student voice on district
school boards was mandated by the Ontario Education Act in 1998. Students in
each one of the 72 provincial school boards are represented by a 'pupil
representative', commonly called "Student Trustee". They are meant to represent
the needs and concerns of students in discussions with the school board
administration and the province. The Ontario Student Trustees' Association,
OSTA-AECO, has become Ontario's chief student stakeholder, providing
professional development to its members and advocates for students' educational
interests. The Society for Democratic Education is an organization in Toronto
that includes many aspects of heightened student inclusion in education reform
policy. The Society for Democratic Education was founded in early 2005 by
Bianca Wylie. It has published several essays and position papers that discuss
the importance of wide-scale education reform, especially in how it applies to
secondary level education and civic education. Another Canadian organization of
note is Learning for a Cause founded in 2004 by educator and poet Michael
Ernest Sweet Learning for a Cause which promotes student voices for social
change through creative writing and publishing opportunities for Canadian
students. Provincial governments and Ministries of Education across Canada are
also getting on board with student engagement and student voice. Alberta
Education launched Speak Out - the Alberta Student Engagement Initiative in
November 2008 and thousands of students have been sharing their ideas on how to
improve how education looks and feels for them. Ontario's SpeakUp initiative
seeks students ideas on what strengthens their engagement in their learning.
Ontario's student voice program is centered around four main intiatives, the
Minister's Student Advisory Council (MSAC), SpeakUp projects, SpeakUp in a Box
and Student Regional Forums. The Minister’s Student Advisory Council (MSAC)
is composed of sixty students, from Grades 7 to 12, they are selected annually
to share their ideas and submit recommendations directly to the Ontario
Minister of Education. MSAC also determines the themes for Regional Student
Forums taking place during the school year. The members of the Minister's
Student Advisory Council have been selected in each year since the inaugural
year including 2010,2011 and 2012. SpeakUp projects are micro-grants for
students. Student submit applications for projects they have designed that
support the goals of the Student Voice initiative, over 1.2 million dollars in
grant money is available yearly. Over 5000 SpeakUp projects have been led since
2008. Regional Student Forums are held across the province where students are
invited to explore, discuss, and make recommendations about factors that
facilitate/hinder their learning. Last, SpeakUp in a box allows students to
hold their own forums for 30 people free of charge with the Ontario Ministry of
Education providing the materials to do so. More information is available at
SpeakUp. The Calgary Board of Education, in 2010, launched the Chief
Superintendent's Student Advisory Council - a group of high school students
with student representation from each of the Calgary Board of Education's high
school programs. They meet regularly with the Calgary Board of Education's
Chief Superintendent, Naomi Johnson, to discuss issues in the system and
propose solutions. Chile. A powerful example of student voice in school
improvement comes from the 2006 student protests in Chile. Throughout the
spring of that year, public high school students from across the country began
a series of protests, school takeovers, and negotiations designed to bolster
support for public education improvement. After seeing the massive effect of
the students, government officials met their demands and are working to support
ongoing reforms as necessitated by students. The government's failure at
meeting the core student proposals triggered the biggest social protests in
Chile since the return of democracy, in 2011, beginning in May and becoming
increasily strong since mid-June. United Kingdom. England has had a long
history of student voice, from Robert Owen's school in New Lanark (allowing the
children to direct their learning through questioning, 1816) to Neillie Dick's
anarchist school in Whitechapel (set-up by her in 1908 aged 13); A.S.Neill's
Summerhill School and Alexander Bloom's St Georges-in-the-East (1945–55).
Summerhill School children and staff have been fighting for greater children's
rights in schools, running training sessions, presentations and workshops for
teachers and children at the House of Commons, London's City Hall, Universities
and Schools. They lobbied at the UN Special Session on the Child, spoke at
UNESCO and have lobbied the Select Committee on Education. Summerhill School
children facilitated the first secondary school children's conference in Dover,
involving some 10 schools. Tower Hamlets primary school children have learnt
about Summerhill and their legal fight for their children's rights; and
regularly work with their local town hall to express their views with the
support of HEC Global Learning Centre, including primary conferences. The
English Secondary Students' Association is the representative body for
secondary students in England. It aims to support students in expressing their
views about education by providing workshops and a network of support with
other secondary school students. The National College for School Leadership
provides career-long learning and development opportunities, professional and
practical support for England's existing and aspiring school leaders. Their
goal is to ensure that school leaders have the skills, recognition, capacity
and ambition to transform the school education system into the best in the
world. The Phoenix Education Trust is the organisation that helped to found
ESSA and currently provides the students with administrative support. It aims
to explore and support education in which children are trusted and respected
and their participation in decision-making is encouraged. involver support
schools to develop sustainable structures for effective student voice, school
councils and participation, and work with teachers and pupils in primary,
secondary and special schools. involver provides training, resources, ongoing
support and access to a large UK network of schools. The Organizing Bureau of
European School Students Unions is the umbrella organisation for secondary
school student organisations in European. Some state schools are also pushing
student Voice internally and independently across the UK. Schools like Quintin
Kynaston Community Academy are now recognised for having one of the largest and
most active Student Voice 'faculties' in the country. Ireland. In Ireland, the
Irish Second-Level Students' Union (ISSU) is the national umbrella body for
second-level school Student Councils. United States. SoundOut is the only
nonprofit education program in the US solely focused on engaging student voice
throughout education. SoundOut works with students, educators, administrators,
policy-makers, and academics to raise the profile, substance, and effect of
student voice in K-12 settings across the country. The National Youth Rights
Association advocates for increased recognition for student rights in schools,
including the right to privacy, student access to records, and student
representation throughout the education system. What Kids Can Do shares stories
of student voice throughout the educational process, both within the school
system and throughout the community. Their highlights emphasize exceptional
learning, belonging, and engagement of students in a variety of capacities for
a variety of purposes, the greatest of which is in order to promote student
voice. WKCD has authored several books about student voice, primarily written
by Kathleen Cushman working with high school students, including "Fires in the
Bathroom: Advice from high schools students for teachers" and "Sent to the
Principal's Office". Education|Evolving integrates student voices with current
major topics in education policy and maintains an online clearinghouse of
student voices on education policy. Their website also has students describing
the learning experiences on video. The High School Survey of Student Engagement
works with high schools across the country to capture students' beliefs and
experiences, and strengthen student engagement in schools. Outcomes. Student
voice is increasingly identified as a pillar of successful school reform, as
educational researchers, academic institutions, and educational support
organizations around the world increasingly advocate for the inclusion of
students in the reform process after identifying student voice as a vital
element of student engagement. See also. Local school examples.
