Student activism Student activism is work done by students to affect political,
environmental, economic, or social change. It has often focused on making
changes in schools, such as increasing student influence over curriculum or
improving educational funding. In some settings, student groups have had a
major role in broader political events. National histories. Argentina. In
Argentina in 1918 student activism triggered a general modernization of the
universities especially tending towards democratization, called The University
Revolution (Spanish: Revolución Universitaria) or Argentine university reform.
The events started in Córdoba and spread to the rest of the country, and then
through much of Latin America. Australia. Australian Students have a long
history of being active in political debates. This is particularly true in the
newer universities that have been established in suburban areas. The National
Union of Students has sometimes been at the forefront of campus activism in
Australia. As in other Western nations, students across Australia also
protested the domination of state-run education on the back of some very strong
protests and even violent clashes with police and other educational and state-
represented authorities - such clashes probably peaking by the year, 1967. As
in other nations, left-wing students, in particular, demanded significant
changes in educational perspective that reflected the down-trodden state of the
working classes. This perspective was a virtual about-face on the more
traditional functionalist view that had previously prevailed in state
education. These clashes and the immensity of opposition of students to
traditional state-perceived functional views of society paved the way for a
'consciousness' of minority groups within society which has changed the
Australian persona on the view of functional society ever since. The newer
theory had graduated by the 1980s into what was perceived as a more 'critical
view' of society. Canada. In Canada, several New Left student organizations
emerged in the late 1950s and 1960s. There were several dominant New Left
groups in Canada, the two main political organizations being the Student Union
for Peace Action (SUPA) and the Company of Young Canadians (CYC). SUPA grew out
of the pacifistic and moralistic Combined Universities Campaign for Nuclear
Disarmament (CUCND) in December, 1965, at a conference at the University of
Saskatchewan, and expanded its scope of affairs to include grass-roots politics
in disadvantaged communities and ‘consciousness raising’ to radicalize and
raise awareness of the ‘generation gap’ experienced by Canadian youth. SUPA
was a decentralized organization, rooted in local university campuses, and thus
inherited the distinctly middle-class orientation of Canadian students. After
SUPA disintegrated in late 1967, its members either moved to the CYC or became
active leaders in the Canadian Union of Students (CUS), leading the CUS to
assume the mantle of New Left student agitation. The organizations were marked
by widespread intellectual debates. For example, with respect to the working
class, the idea that the traditional ‘working class’ had been bought off
and integrated into the system was widespread in these discussions, leaving the
question of who now represented the most important actor in the struggle for a
new and better socialist society. Indeed, SUPA fell apart over these debates
over the role of the working class and the 'Old Left'. In 1968 Students for a
Democratic University (SDU) was formed in McGill and Simon Fraser University.
The SFU SDU was originally composed of former SUPA members and New Democratic
Youth but also absorbed members from the campus Liberal Club and Young
Socialists. SDU was prominent in the Administration Occupation of that year and
the student strike in 1969. After the failure of the student strike SDU broke
up. Some members joined the IWW and the Youth International Party. (Yippies)
Other members helped form the Vancouver Liberation Front in 1970. Since the
1970s Public Interest Research Groups (PIRG's) have been created as a result of
Student's Union referendums across Canada e.g. Ontario Public Interest Research
Group, the Alberta Public Interest Research Group (APIRG) and the Nova Scotia
Public Interest Research Group. For a more complete list of PIRGs in Canada see
pirg.ca . Canadian PIRG's are unique from their American counterparts in that,
in principle, the projects are student directed and run. Most, if not all,
Canadian PIRG's operate on a consensus decision making model. Canadian PIRGs
are student run and the majority of their funding comes directly from students.
Although some efforts have been made towards collaboration Canadian PIRGs are
independent of each other. The Student Coalition Against War was formed to
focus on public education, non-violent activism, organizing, advocacy and above
all, reform. China. Since the defeat of the Qing Dynasty during the First
(1839–1842) and Second Opium Wars (1856–1860), student activism has played
a significant role in the modern Chinese history. Fueled mostly by Chinese
nationalism, Chinese student activism strongly believes that young people are
responsible for China's future. This strong nationalistic belief has been able
to manifest in several forms such as Democracy, anti-Americanism and Communism.
One of the most important acts of student activism in Chinese history is the
May Fourth Movement, which over 3,000 students of Peking University and other
schools gathered together in front of Tiananmen and held a demonstration. It is
regarded as an essential step of the democratic revolution in China, and it had
also give birth to Chinese Communism. Anti-Americanism movements led by the
students during the Chinese Civil War were also instrumental in discrediting
the KMT government and bring the Communist victory in China. In 1989, the
democracy movement led by the students at the Tiananmen Square protests ended
in a brutal government crackdown which would later be called a massacre.
Eastern Europe and the post-Soviet Union states. During communist rule,
students in Eastern Europe were the force behind several of the best-known
instances of protest. The chain of events leading to the 1956 Hungarian
Revolution was started by peaceful student demonstrations in the streets of
Budapest, later attracting workers and other Hungarians. In Czechoslovakia, one
of the most known faces of the protests following the Soviet-led invasion that
ended the Prague Spring was Jan Palach, a student who committed suicide by
setting fire to himself on January 16, 1969. The act triggered a major protest
against the occupation. Student-dominated youth movements have also played a
central role in the "color revolutions" seen in post-communist societies in
recent years. The first example of this was the Serbian Otpor ("Resistance" in
Serbian), formed in October 1998 as a response to repressive university and
media laws that were introduced that year. In the presidential campaign in
September 2000, the organisation engineered the "Gotov je" ("He's finished")
campaign that galvanized Serbian discontent with Slobodan Milošević,
ultimately resulting in his defeat. Otpor has inspired other youth movements in
Eastern Europe, such as Kmara in Georgia, that played an important role in the
Rose Revolution, and Pora in Ukraine, the most important movement organising
the demonstrations that led to the Orange Revolution. Like Otpor, these
organisations have consequently practiced non-violent resistance and used
ridiculing humor in opposing authoritarian leaders. Similar movements include
KelKel in Kyrgyzstan, Zubr in Belarus and MJAFT! in Albania. Opponents of the
"color revolutions" have accused the Soros Foundations and/or the United States
government of supporting and even planning the revolutions in order to serve
western interests. Supporters of the revolutions have argued that these
allegations are greatly exaggerated, and that the revolutions were positive
events, morally justified, whether or not Western support had an influence on
the events. France. In France, student activists have been influential in
shaping public debate. In May 1968 the University of Paris at Nanterre was
closed due to problems between the students and the administration. In protest
of the closure and the expulsion of Nanterre students, students of the Sorbonne
in Paris began their own demonstration. The situation escalated into a nation-
wide insurrection during which a variety of groups, including communists,
anarchists, and right-wing libertarian activists, used the tension to advocate
their own causes. The events in Paris were followed by student protests
throughout the world. The German student movement participated in major
demonstrations against proposed emergency legislation. In many countries, the
student protests caused authorities to respond with violence. In Spain, student
demonstrations against Franco's dictatorship led to clashes with police. A
student demonstration in Mexico City ended in a storm of bullets on the night
of October 2, 1968, an event known as the Tlatelolco massacre. Even in
Pakistan, students took to the streets to protest changes in education policy,
and on November 7 a college student was shot dead as police opened fire on a
demonstration. Germany. In 1815 in Jena (Germany) the "Urburschenschaft" was
founded. That was a Studentenverbindung that was concentrated on national and
democratic ideas. In 1817, inspired by liberal and patriotic ideas of a united
Germany, student organisations gathered for the Wartburg festival at Wartburg
Castle, at Eisenach in Thuringia, on the occasion of which reactionary books
were burnt. In 1819 the student Karl Ludwig Sand murdered the writer August von
Kotzebue, who had scoffed at liberal student organisations. In May 1832 the
Hambacher Fest was celebrated at Hambach Castle near Neustadt an der
Weinstraße with about 30 000 participants, amongst them many students.
Together with the Frankfurter Wachensturm in 1833 planned to free students held
in prison at Frankfurt and Georg Büchner's revolutionary pamphlet "Der
Hessische Landbote" that were events that led to the revolutions in the German
states in 1848. In the 1960s, the worldwide upswing in student and youth
radicalism manifested itself through the German student movement and
organisations such as the German Socialist Student Union. The movement in
Germany shared many concerns of similar groups elsewhere, such as the
democratisation of society and opposing the Vietnam War, but also stressed more
nationally specific issues such as coming to terms with the legacy of the Nazi
regime and opposing the German Emergency Acts. Indonesia. In Indonesia,
university student groups have repeatedly been the first groups to stage street
demonstrations calling for governmental change at key points in the nation's
history, and other organizations from across the political spectrum have sought
to align themselves with student groups. In 1928, the Youth Pledge (Sumpah
Pemuda) helped to give voice to anti-colonial sentiments. During the political
turmoil of the 1960s, right-wing student groups staged demonstrations calling
for then-President Sukarno to eliminate alleged Communists from his government,
and later demanding that he resign. Sukarno did step down in 1967, and was
replaced by Army general Suharto. Student groups also played a key role in
Suharto's 1998 fall by initiating large demonstrations that gave voice to
widespread popular discontent with the president. High school and university
students in Jakarta, Yogyakarta, Medan, and elsewhere were some of the first
groups willing to speak out publicly against the military government. Student
groups were a key part of the political scene during this period. For example,
upon taking office after Suharto stepped down, B. J. Habibie made numerous
mostly unsuccessful overtures to placate the student groups that had brought
down his predecessor, meeting with student leaders and the families of students
killed by security forces during demonstrations. Further reading Documentary
Movie Iran. In Iran, students have been at the forefront of protests both
against the pre-1979 secular monarchy and, in recent years, against the
theocratic islamic republic. Both religious and more moderate students played a
major part in Ruhollah Khomeini's opposition network against the Shah Mohammad
Reza Pahlavi. In January 1978 the army dispersed demonstrating students and
religious leaders, killing several students and sparking a series of widespread
protests that ultimately led to the Iranian Revolution the following year. On
November 4, 1979, militant Iranian students calling themselves the Muslim
Students Following the Line of the Imam seized the U.S. embassy in Tehran
holding 52 embassy employees hostage for a 444 days (see Iran hostage crisis).
Recent years have seen several incidents when liberal students have clashed
with the Iranian regime, most notably the Iranian student riots of July 1999.
Several people were killed in a week of violent confrontations that started
with a police raid on a university dormitory, a response to demonstrations by a
group of students of Tehran University against the closure of a reformist
newspaper. Akbar Mohammadi was given a death sentence, later reduced to 15
years in prison, for his role in the protests. In 2006, he died at Evin prison
after a hunger strike protesting the refusal to allow him to seek medical
treatment for injuries suffered as a result of torture. At the end of 2002,
students held mass demonstrations protesting the death sentence of reformist
lecturer Hashem Aghajari for alleged blasphemy. In June 2003, several thousand
students took to the streets of Tehran in anti-government protests sparked by
government plans to privatise some universities. In the May 2005 Iranian
presidential election, Iran's largest student organization, "The Office to
Consolidate Unity", advocated a voting boycott. After the election of President
Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, student protests against the government has continued. In
May 2006, up to 40 police officers were injured in clashes with demonstrating
students in Tehran. At the same time, the Iranian regime has called for student
action in line with its own political agenda. In 2006, President Ahmadinejad
urged students to organize campaigns to demand that liberal and secular
university teachers be removed. In 2009, after the disputed presidential
election, a series of student protests broke out. The violent measures used by
the Iranian regime to suppress these protests have been the subject of
widespread international condemnation. Israel. In Israel the student was
leading the 2011 Israeli social justice protests in Tel Aviv. that became after
that Cottage cheese boycott. Japan. Japanese student movement began during the
Taishō Democracy, and grew in activity after World War II. They were mostly
carried out by activist students. One such event was the Anpo opposition
movement, which occurred during 1960, and again in 1968 – 1970, in opposition
to Anpo. During the second riots, leftist activists barricaded themselves in
Universities, resulting in armed conflict with the Japanese police force.
Activists organized in places known as "agitating points". Some wider causes
were supported including opposition to the Vietnam War and apartheid, and for
the acceptance of the hippie lifestyle. Malaysia. Since the amendment of
Section 15 of the Universities and University Colleges Act 1971 (UUCA) in 1975,
students were barred from being members of, and expressing support or
opposition to, any political parties or "any organization, body or group of
persons which the Minister, after consultation with the Board, has specified in
writing to the Vice-Chancellor to be unsuitable to the interests and well-being
of the students or the University." However, in October 2011, the Court of
Appeal ruled that the relevant provision in Section 15 UUCA was
unconstitutional due to Article 10 of the Federal Constitution pertaining to
freedom of expression. Since the act prohibiting students from expressing
“support, sympathy or opposition” to any political party was enacted in
1971, Malaysian students have repeatedly demanded that the ban on political
involvement be rescinded. The majority of students are not interested in
politics because they are afraid that the universities will take action against
them. The U.U.C.A. has successfully made the students fearful to criticize the
government. In Kuala Lumpur on 14th April 2012, student activists camped out at
Independence Square and marched against a government loan program that they
said charged students high interest rates and left them with debt. The largest
student movement in Malaysia is the "Solidariti Mahasiswa Malaysia (SMM)"
(Student Solidarity of Malaysia). SMM is a coalition group that represents
about 15 student organizations. SMM was established in the year of 2003.
Currently, SMM is actively campaigning against the UUCA and a free education at
primary, secondary and tertiary level. México. During the protests of 1968,
Mexican government killed students and civilian protesters. This killing is
known as in the Tlatelolco massacre United Kingdom. Student politics has
existed in U.K since the 1880s with the formation of the student representative
councils, precursors of union organisations designed to present students
interests. These later evolved into unions, many of which became part of the
National Union of Students formed in 1921. However, the NUS was designed to be
specifically outside of "political and religious interests", reducing its
importance as a centre for student activism. During the 1930s students began to
become more politically involved with the formation of many socialist societies
at universities, ranging from social democratic to marxist-leninist and
trotskyite, even leading to Brian Simon, a communist, becoming head of the NUS.
However, it was not until the 1960s that student activism became important in
British universities. Here, like many other countries, the Vietnam war and
issues of Racism became a focus for many other local frustrations, such as fees
and student representation. In 1962, the first student protest against the
Vietnam War was held, with CND. However, student activism did not begin on a
large scale until the mid-1960s. In 1965, a student protest of 250 students was
held outside Edinburgh's American embassy and the beginning of protests against
the Vietnam war in Grovesnor square. It also saw the first student teach-in at
Oxford, where students debated alternative non-violent means of protest and
protests at the London School of Economics against the government of Ian Smith
in Rhodesia. In 1966 the "Radical Student Alliance" and Vietnam Solidarity
Campaign were formed, both of which became centres for the protest movement.
However, the first student sit-in was held at the London School of Economics in
1967 by their Student's Union over the suspension of two students. Its success
and a national student rally of 100,000 held in the same year is usually
considered to mark the start of the movement. Up until the mid 1970's student
activities were held including a protest of up to 80,000 strong in Grovesnor
square, anti-racist protests and occupations in Newcastle, the breaking down of
riot control gates and forced closure of the London School of Economics and
Jack Straw becoming the head of the NUS for the RSA. However, two important
things should be noted about the student activisim in the UK. Firstly, most
British students still had faith in the democratic system and the authorities
knew not to be too heavy handed with the protestors. Secondly, many protests
were over more local issues, such as student representation in college
governance, better accommodation, lower fees or even canteen prices. Student
protests erupted again in 2010 during the Premiership of David Cameron over the
issue of Tuition fees, higher education funding cuts and withdrawal of the
Education Maintenance Allowance. Though largely non-violent, some students and
police were injured in a few isolated incidents. United States. In the United
States, student activism is often understood as a form of youth activism that
is specifically oriented toward change in the American educational system.
Student activism in the United States dates to the beginning of public
education, if not before. The best early historical documentation comes from
the 1930s. The American Youth Congress was a student-led organization in
Washington, DC, which lobbied the US Congress against racial discrimination and
for youth programs. It was heavily supported by First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt.
The 1960s saw student activists gaining increased political prominence. One
highlight of this period was Students for a Democratic Society (SDS) launched
in Ann Arbor, Michigan, a student-led organization that focused on schools as a
social agent that simultaneously oppresses and potentially uplifts society. SDS
eventually spun off the Weather Underground. Another successful group was Ann
Arbor Youth Liberation, which featured students calling for an end to state-led
education. Also notable was the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee,
which fought against racism and for integration of public schools across the
US. These specific organizations closed in the mid-1970s. The largest student
strike in American history took place in May and June 1970, in response to the
Kent State shootings and the American invasion of Cambodia. In the early 1980s
several formalized organizations brought neoliberal models of student activism
to campuses across the nation, especially the Campus Outreach Opportunity
League (C.O.O.L.). They claim large responsibility for identifying and
championing the interest in service among higher education students. American
society saw an increase in student activism again in the 1990s with the
ushering in of the neoliberal community service policies of Bill Clinton. The
popular education reform movement has led to a resurgence of populist student
activism against standardized testing and teaching, as well as more complex
issues including military/industrial/prison complex and the influence of the
military and corporations in education There is also increased emphasis on
ensuring that changes that are made are sustainable, by pushing for better
education funding and policy or leadership changes that engage students as
decision-makers in schools. Major contemporary campaigns include work for
funding of public schools, against increased tuitions at colleges or the use of
sweatshop labor in manufacturing school apparel (e.g. United students against
sweatshops), for increased student voice throughout education planning,
delivery, and policy-making (e.g. The Roosevelt Institution), and to raise
national and local awareness of the humanitarian consequences of the Darfur
Conflict There is also increasing activism around the issue of global warming.
Antiwar activism has also increased leading to the creation of the Campus
Antiwar Network and the refounding of SDS in 2006. Current activities. Modern
student activist movements vary widely in subject, size, and success, with all
kinds of students in all kinds of educational settings participating, including
public and private school students; elementary, middle, senior, undergraduate,
and graduate students; and all races, socio-economic backgrounds, and political
perspectives. Popular issues include youth voice, student rights, school
funding, drug policy reform, anti-racism in education, tuition increases (in
colleges), supporting campus workers' struggles, and many other areas. For more
information, see youth activism. Criticisms. A contemporary challenge of
student activism comes from the late Brazilian educator Paulo Freire, who
identified the crisis of the "pure activist" who operates without critical
reflection Thus Freire believed that by eliminating the reflective process from
activism, organizers may actually perpetuate the very problems they purport to
address.
