Stump speech (politics) A political stump speech is a standard speech used by a
politician running for office. Origins. The term is derived from the custom in
19th century America for political candidates campaigning from town to town to
stand upon a cut down tree's stump to deliver a standard speech. Because the
busy pace of campaigning often forces candidates to address people several
times per week or even per day, the candidate and his or her staff will usually
write a single speech to be delivered at most public appearances. The beginning
of the speech is usually tweaked to include mentions of local elected officials
and campaign staff, with local references sometimes peppered throughout, but
most of the speech remains identical from day to day. The need for a stump
speech stems from a desire to keep candidates focused on their message and to
consistently present certain arguments or point out certain aspects of their
political platform. Candidates will often use major events to unveil a new or
substantially revised stump speech. U.S. campaigns. In presidential campaigns
in the U.S., a candidate's speech at his or her party's presidential nominating
convention usually forms the basis for the stump speech for the duration of the
national campaign. Stump speeches are not meant to generate news, outside of
local media covering a candidate's appearance. National media usually ignore
their contents in their daily news coverage. The predictability of stump
speeches allows reporters to generally know when a candidate is preparing to
wrap up. A famous example of this comes from Governor of New York Nelson
Rockefeller, who would constantly use the phrase "the brotherhood of man, under
the fatherhood of God" toward the end of his speeches during his multiple bids
for the Republican Party presidential nomination. Reporters covering
Rockefeller came to abbreviate the expression as BOMFOG. External links. An
example is provided by the Washington Post on a 2008 presidential candidate
Barack Obama speech, complete with time line, segmentation and videos. http://
www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/graphic/2008/02/26/GR2008022600417.html.
