Subgame perfect equilibrium In game theory, a subgame perfect equilibrium (or
subgame perfect Nash equilibrium) is a refinement of a Nash equilibrium used in
dynamic games. A strategy profile is a subgame perfect equilibrium if it
represents a Nash equilibrium of every subgame of the original game.
Informally, this means that if (1) the players played any smaller game that
consisted of only one part of the larger game and (2) their behavior represents
a Nash equilibrium of that smaller game, then their behavior is a subgame
perfect equilibrium of the larger game. It is well known that every finite
extensive game has a subgame perfect equilibrium. A common method for
determining subgame perfect equilibria in the case of a finite game is backward
induction. Here one first considers the last actions of the game and determines
which actions the final mover should take in each possible circumstance to
maximize his/her utility. One then supposes that the last actor will do these
actions, and considers the second to last actions, again choosing those that
maximize that actor's utility. This process continues until one reaches the
first move of the game. The strategies which remain are the set of all subgame
perfect equilibria for finite-horizon extensive games of perfect information.
However, backward induction cannot be applied to games of imperfect or
incomplete information because this entails cutting through non-singleton
information sets. The set of subgame perfect equilibria for a given game is
always a subset of the set of Nash equilibria for that game. In some cases the
sets can be identical. The Ultimatum game provides an intuitive example of a
game with fewer subgame perfect equilibria than Nash equilibria. Finding
subgame-perfect equilibria. Reinhard Selten proved that any game which can be
broken into "sub-games" containing a sub-set of all the available choices in
the main game will have a subgame perfect Nash Equilibrium strategy (possibly
as a mixed strategy giving non-deterministic sub-game decisions). Subgame
perfection is only used with games of complete information. Subgame perfection
can be used with extensive form games of complete but imperfect information.
The subgame-perfect Nash equilibrium is normally deduced by "backward
induction" from the various ultimate outcomes of the game, eliminating branches
which would involve any player making a move that is not credible (because it
is not optimal) from that node. One game in which the backward induction
solution is well known is tic-tac-toe, but in theory even Go has such an
optimum strategy for all players. The interesting aspect of the word "credible"
in the preceding paragraph is that taken as a whole (disregarding the
irreversibility of reaching sub-games) strategies exist which are superior to
subgame perfect strategies, but which are not credible in the sense that a
threat to carry them out will harm the player making the threat and prevent
that combination of strategies. For instance in the game of "chicken" if one
player has the option of ripping the steering wheel from their car they should
always take it because it leads to a "sub game" in which their rational
opponent is precluded from doing the same thing (and killing them both). The
wheel-ripper will always win the game (making his opponent swerve away), and
the opponent's threat to suicidally follow suit is not credible.
