Subjective theory of value The subjective theory of value, also known as the
theory of subjective value, is an economic theory of value that identifies
worth as being based on the wants and needs of the members of a society, as
opposed to value being inherent to an object. It holds that to possess value an
object must be useful, with the extent of that value dependent upon the ability
of an object to satisfy the wants of any given individual. "Value", in this
context, is separate from exchange value or price, except insofar as the latter
is intended to help identify the former; the value of any good or service
simply being whatever someone would trade for it in the present. This creates
problems as consumers tend to bid up prices if they are funding demand with
credit. This tends to separate subjective values from stable values. The theory
recognizes that one thing may be more useful in satisfying the wants of one
person than another, or of no use to one person and of use to another. The
theory contrasts with intrinsic theories of value that hold that there is an
objectively correct value of an object that can be determined irrespective of
individual value judgements, such as by analyzing the amount of labor incurred
in producing the object (see labor theory of value). Overview. The theory holds
that things become valuable in the economic sense (have exchange value or
price) under two conditions: 1) They are useful in satisfying human wants, and
are therefore desired. 2) There are not enough of them, or just enough of them,
to satisfy demand. Any goods that are in unlimited supply would have no value.
In other words, those useful items that are of insufficient quantity to satisfy
demand have a price, and those that exist in numbers superfluous to demand (or
that satisfy no wants) are free. The subjective theory of value was built upon
to develop marginalist economics. The subjective theory contrasts with
intrinsic theories of value, such as the labor theory of value which holds that
the economic value of a thing is contingent upon how much labor was -
necessarily - exerted in producing it - under the condition, however, that this
"thing" has a use value. For example David Ricardo said, "The value of a
commodity, or the quantity of any other commodity for which it will exchange,
depends on the relative quantity of labour which is necessary for its
production, and not as the greater or less compensation which is paid for that
labour." In the context of a free market, several major conclusions follow from
the theory. The theory contrasts with normative versions of the labor theory of
value that say the exchange value of a good "should" be proportional to how
much socially necessary labor went into producing it. The subjective theory of
value is a denial of intrinsic value. It leads to the conclusion that there is
no proper price of a good or service other than the rate at which it trades in
a free market. Whereas the labor theory of value has been used to condemn
profit as exploitation, the subjective theory of value rebuts that
condemnation: a buyer "in a free market" who offers to pay a price lower than
that which is commensurate with the amount of labor used to produce the good
merely communicates information to the seller about the value the good might
create for the buyer. (The price offered is not a "measure" of subjective
value; it is just a means of communication between the buyer and the seller.)
The offer is in one sense an expression of the buyer's opinion, which the
seller is free to reject. The subjective theory of value supports the inference
that all voluntary trade is mutually beneficial. An individual purchases a
thing because he values it more than he values what he offers in trade;
otherwise he wouldn't make the trade, but would keep the thing he values more
highly. Likewise, the seller agrees to trade only if he values the good less
than the price he receives. In a free market, both parties therefore enter the
exchange in the belief that they will receive more value than they transfer to
the other party. In turn, this leads to a third important conclusion: the mere
act of voluntary trade increases total wealth in society, where wealth is
understood to refer to an individual's subjective valuation of all of his
possessions. In contrast to intrinsic-value theories, which tend to support the
conclusion either that wealth creation is impossible (zero-sum), or that wealth
creation is possible only by the application of labor, the subjective-value
theory holds that one can create value simply by transferring ownership of a
thing to someone who values it more highly, without necessarily modifying that
thing. Criticisms. Economist Paul Mattick argued that the subjective theory of
value leads to circular reasoning. Prices are supposed to measure the "marginal
utility" of the commodity. However, prices are required by the consumer in
order to make the evaluations on how best to maximise their satisfaction. Hence
subjective value "obviously rested on circular reasoning. Although it tried to
explain prices, prices were necessary to explain marginal utility". Trade
unionist Allan Engler noted that prices exist before subjective evaluations can
take place, so "prices are determined by marginal utility; marginal utility is
measured by prices. Prices... are nothing more or less than prices.
Marginalists, having begun their search in the field of subjectivity, proceeded
to walk in a circle".
