Substitute good In economics, one way two or more goods are classified is by
examining the relationship of the demand schedules when the price of one good
changes. This relationship between demand schedules leads to classification of
goods as either substitutes or complements. Substitute goods are goods which,
as a result of changed conditions, may replace each other in use (or
consumption). A substitute good, in contrast to a complementary good, is a good
with a positive cross elasticity of demand. This means a good's demand is
increased when the price of another good is increased. Conversely, the demand
for a good is decreased when the price of another good is decreased. If goods A
and B are substitutes, an increase in the price of A will result in a leftward
movement along the demand curve of A and cause the demand curve for B to shift
out. A decrease in the price of A will result in a rightward movement along the
demand curve of A and cause the demand curve for B to shift in. ex Classic
examples of substitute goods include margarine and butter, tea and coffee.
Substitute goods not only occur on the consumer side of the market but also the
producer side. Substitutable producer goods would include: petroleum and
natural gas (used for heating or electricity). The degree to which a good has a
perfect substitute depends on how specifically the good is defined. Take for
example, the demand for Rice Krispies cereal, which is a very narrowly defined
good as compared to the demand for cereal generally. The fact that one good is
substitutable for another has immediate economic consequences: insofar as one
good can be substituted for another, the demand for the two kinds of good will
be bound together by the fact that customers can trade off one good for the
other if it becomes advantageous to do so. Increase in price. An "increase" in
price (ceteris paribus) will result in an "increase" in demand for its
substitute goods. If two goods have a high substitutability, the change in
demand will be much greater. Thus, economists can predict that a spike in the
cost of a particular brand of detergent will likely result in a large change in
demand for other brands, whereas a change in the price of pencils will have a
much smaller effect on the demand for pens. This is because most detergents are
very similar, and thus have high substitutability, whereas pencils and pens are
only partial substitutes - while they are sometimes interchangeable, many
consumers prefer one over the other and there are some situations where only
one is acceptable, such as pens on legal documents or pencils on most high-
school maths homework. Different types. It is important to note that when
speaking about substitute goods we are speaking about "two different kinds" of
goods; so the "substitutability" of one good for another is always a matter of
degree. One good is a perfect substitute for another only if it can be used in
exactly the same way. In that case the utility of a combination is an
increasing function of the sum of the two amounts, and theoretically, in the
case of a price difference, there would be no demand for the more expensive
good. In microeconomics, two types of substitutes are being distinguished,
gross substitutes and net substitutes. Good formula_1 is said to be gross
substitute of good formula_2 if Goods X and Y are said to be net substitutes if
where formula_5 is a utility function for the two goods. Substitutability of a
good. Goods that are completely substitutable with each other are called
perfect substitutes. They may be characterized as goods having a constant
marginal rate of substitution. Writeable compact disks from different
manufacturers are often considered to be perfect substitutes. As the price of
one brand of CD rises, consumers will be expected to substitute other brands of
CD in a one-to-one fashion. This means that the total quantity of CDs purchased
would not change. Imperfect substitutes have a lesser level of
substitutability, and therefore exhibit variable marginal rates of substitution
along the consumer indifference curve. The consumption points on the curve
offer the same level of utility as before but the compensation now depends on
the starting point of the substitution. An example of such a product is the
soft drink. As the price of Coca-Cola rises, consumers would be expected to
substitute Pepsi. However, many consumers prefer one brand of soft drink over
the other. Consumers who prefer Coke to Pepsi, for example, will not trade
between them in a one-to-one fashion. Rather, a consumer would be willing to
give relatively large amounts of Pepsi in exchange for relatively small amounts
of Coke. Perfect Competition. One of the requirements for perfect competition
is that the products of competing firms should be perfect substitutes. When
this condition is not satisfied, the market is characterized by product
differentiation. Good Substitution. Substitute goods exhibit no
complementarities, as in a complementary good. In other words, good
substitution is an economic concept where two goods are of comparable value.
Potatoes from different farms are an example; if the price one farm's potatoes
goes up, people will stop buying them and buy the other farm's instead, ceteris
paribus (assuming that potatoes from different farms are homogeneous)
