Subsidy A subsidy is assistance paid to a business or economic sector or
producers. Most subsidies are set in place by the government for producers or
are distributed as subventions in an industry to prevent the decline of that
industry (e.g., as a result of continuous unprofitable operations) or an
increase in the prices of its products or simply to encourage it to hire more
labor (as in the case of a wage subsidy). Examples are subsidies to encourage
the sale of exports; subsidies on some foods to keep down the cost of living,
especially in urban areas; and subsidies to encourage the expansion of farm
production and achieve self-reliance in food production. Subsidy has been used
by economists with different meanings and connotations in different contexts.
The dictionary Oxford defines it as "money granted by state, public body, etc.,
to keep down the prices of commodities, etc.”. Environmental economists
define subsidies as uncompensated environmental damage arising from any flow of
goods and services. In a budgetary context, it may be defined as “unrecovered
costs in the public provision of private goods”. Subsidies are often regarded
as a form of protectionism or trade barrier by making domestic goods and
services artificially competitive against imports. Subsidies may distort
markets, and can impose large economic costs. Financial assistance in the form
of a subsidy may come from one's government, but the term "subsidy" may also
refer to assistance granted by others, such as individuals or non-governmental
institutions. Examples of industries or sectors where subsidies are often found
include utilities, gasoline in the United States, welfare, farm subsidies, and
(in some countries) certain aspects of student loans. Types of subsidies. There
are many different ways to classify subsidies, such as the reason behind them,
the recipients of the subsidy, the source of the funds (government, consumer,
general tax revenues, etc.). In economics, one of the primary ways to classify
subsidies is the means of distributing the subsidy. In economics, the term
"subsidy" may or may not have a negative connotation: that is, the use of the
term may be prescriptive but descriptive. In economics, a subsidy may
nonetheless be characterized as inefficient relative to no subsidies;
inefficient relative to other means of producing the same results; "second-
best", implying an inefficient but feasible solution (contrasted with an
efficient but not feasible ideal), among other possible terminology. In other
cases, a subsidy may be an efficient means of correcting a market failure. For
example, economic analysis may suggest that direct subsidies (cash benefits)
would be more efficient than indirect subsidies (such as trade barriers); this
does not necessarily imply that direct subsidies are "bad", but they may be
more efficient or effective than other mechanisms to achieve the same (or
better) results. Insofar as they are inefficient, however, subsidies would
generally be considered by economists to be "bad", as economics is the study of
efficient use of limited resources. Ultimately, however, the choice to enact a
subsidy is a political choice. Note that subsidies are linked to the concept of
economic transfers from one group to another. Another form of subsidy is due to
the practice of a government guaranteeing a lender payment if a particular
borrower defaults. This occurs in the United States, for example, in certain
airline industry loans, in most student loans, in small business administration
loans, in Ginnie Mae mortgage-backed bonds, and is alleged to occur in the
mortgage-backed bonds issued through Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. A government
guarantee of payment lowers the risk of the loan for a lender, and since
interest rates are primarily based on risk, the interest rate for the borrower
lowers as well. Effects. In standard supply and demand curve diagrams, a
subsidy will shift either the demand curve up or the supply curve down. A
subsidy that increases the production will tend to result in a lower price,
while a subsidy that increases demand will tend to result in an increase in
price. Both cases result in a new economic equilibrium. Therefore it is
essential to consider elasticity when estimating the total costs of a planned
subsidy: it equals the subsidy per unit (difference between market price and
subsidized price) times the new equilibrium quantity. One category of goods
suffers less from this effect: Public goods are—once created—in ample
supply and the total costs of subsidies remain constant regardless of the
number of consumers; depending on the form of the subsidy, however, the number
of producers on demanding their share of benefits may still rise and drive
costs up. The recipient of the subsidy may need to be distinguished from the
beneficiary of the subsidy, and this analysis will depend on elasticity of
supply and demand as well as other factors. For example, a subsidy for
consumption of milk by consumers may appear to benefit consumers (or some may
benefit and the consumer may derive no gain, as the higher prices for milk
offset the subsidy). The net effect and identification of winners and losers is
rarely straightforward, but subsidies generally result in a transfer of wealth
from one group to another (or transfer between sub-groups). Subsidy may also be
used to refer to government actions which limit competition or raise the prices
at which producers could sell their products, for example, by means of tariff
protection. History. In the 16th century "subsidy" referred to taxation, for
example the tax introduced in England by Thomas Wolsey in 1513 based on the
ability to pay. Recent controversies. Human-rights based non-governmental
organizations like Oxfam describe such subsidies as dumping millions of surplus
commodities (like sugar) on world markets, destroying competition from farmers
in undeveloped and poor countries, especially in Africa. For example, in the
past EU spent €3.30 in subsidies to export sugar worth €1. Another example
of trade distorting subsidies is the Common Agricultural Policy of the European
Union. It represents 48% of the entire EU's budget, €49.8 billion in 2006 (up
from €48.5 billion in 2005). These subsidies have remained in place even
though many international accords have reduced other forms of subsidies or
tariffs. The Commitment to Development Index, published by the Center for
Global Development, measures the effect that subsidies and trade barriers
actually have on the undeveloped world. It uses trade along with six other
components such as aid or investment to rank and evaluate developed countries
on policies that affect the undeveloped world. It finds that the richest
countries spend $106 billion per year subsidizing their own farmers - almost
exactly as much as they spend on foreign aid. Some critics argue that American
government subsidies are contributing to the country's obesity levels. So-
called junk foods are made cheaper due to the subsidy programs, thus increasing
consumption of such foods. With the National Football League (NFL) profits
topping records at $11 Billion, the highest of all sports, in stark contrast to
the American economic late-2000s recession, attention is starting to look at
the NFL's tax-exempt status and all the Stadiums built through tax-free
borrowing by the Cities, resulting in subsidies that come from the pockets of
every American taxpayer.
