Suffrage Suffrage, political franchise, or simply franchise, distinct from
other rights to vote, is the right to vote gained through the democratic
process. In English, suffrage and its synonyms are sometimes also used to mean
the right to run for office (to be a candidate), but there are no established
qualifying terms to distinguish between these different meanings of the term
(s). The right to run for office is sometimes called (candidate) eligibility,
and the combination of both rights is sometimes called full suffrage. In many
other languages, the right to vote is called the active right to vote and the
right to be voted for (to run for office) is called the passive right to vote.
In English, these are sometimes called active suffrage and passive suffrage.
Suffrage is often conceived in terms of elections for representatives; however,
suffrage applies equally to initiative and referendum. Suffrage describes not
only the legal right to vote, but also the practical question of whether a
question will be put to a vote. The utility of suffrage is reduced when
important questions are decided unilaterally by elected or non-elected
representatives. In most democracies, eligible voters can vote in elections of
representatives. Voting on issues by initiative may be available in some
jurisdictions but not others. For example, Switzerland permits initiatives at
all levels of government whereas the United States does not offer initiatives
at the federal level or in many states. That new constitutions must be approved
by referendum is considered natural law. Citizens become eligible to vote after
reaching the voting age, which is typically 18 years as of 2012. Most
democracies no longer extend different rights to vote on the basis of sex or
race. Resident aliens can vote in some countries and in others exceptions are
made for citizens of countries with which they have close links (e.g. some
members of the Commonwealth of Nations, and the members of the European Union).
Types of suffrage. Universal suffrage. Where Universal suffrage exists, the
right to vote is not restricted by gender, race, social status, or wealth. It
typically does not extend a right to vote to all residents of a region;
distinctions are frequently made in regard to citizenship, age, and
occasionally mental capacity or criminal convictions. The short-lived Corsican
Republic (1755–1769) was the first country to grant limited universal
suffrage for all inhabitants over the age of 25. This was followed by other
experiments in the Paris Commune of 1871 and the island republic of Franceville
(1889). In 1893, New Zealand became the first major nation to achieve universal
suffrage, and the Freedom in the World index lists New Zealand as the only free
country in the world in 1893. In 1906, Finland became the second country in the
world, and the first in Europe, to grant universal suffrage to its citizens.
Women's suffrage. Women's suffrage is the right of women to vote on the same
terms as men. This was the goal of the suffragists and the suffragettes.
Limited voting rights were gained by some women in Sweden, Britain, and some
western U.S. states in the 1860s. In 1893, the British colony of New Zealand
became the first self-governing nation to extend the right to vote to all adult
women. In 1894 the women of South Australia achieved the right to both vote
"and" stand for Parliament. The autonomous Grand Duchy of Finland in the
Russian Empire was the first European nation to allow all women to both vote
and run for parliament. Equal suffrage. Equal suffrage is sometimes confused
with "Universal suffrage", although its meaning is the removal of graded votes,
where a voter could possess a number of votes in accordance with income, wealth
or social status. Census suffrage. Also known as "censitary suffrage", the
opposite of "Equal suffrage," meaning that the votes cast by those eligible to
vote are not equal, but are weighed differently according to the person's rank
in the census (e.g., people with high income have more votes than those with a
small income, or a stockholder in a company with more shares has more votes
than someone with fewer shares). Suffrage may therefore be limited, usually to
the propertied classes, but can still be "universal," including, for instance,
women or ethnic minorities, if they meet the census. Compulsory suffrage. Where
Compulsory suffrage exists, those who are eligible to vote are required by law
to do so. Thirty-two countries currently practice this form of suffrage. Forms
of exclusion from suffrage. Religion. In the aftermath of the Reformation it
was common in European countries for people of disfavored religious
denominations to be denied civil and political rights, often including the
right to vote, to stand for election or to sit in parliament. In the United
Kingdom and Ireland, Roman Catholics were denied the right to vote from 1728 to
1793, and the right to sit in parliament until 1829. The anti-Catholic policy
was justified on the grounds that the loyalty of Catholics supposedly lay with
the Pope rather than the national monarch. In England and Ireland, several Acts
practically disenfranchised non-Anglicans or non-Protestants by imposing an
oath before admission to vote or to run for office. The 1672 and 1678 Test Acts
forbade non-Anglicans to hold public offices, the 1727 Disenfranchising Act
took away Catholics' ("Papists"') voting rights in Ireland, which were restored
only in 1788. Jews could not even be naturalized. An attempt was made to change
this situation, but the Jewish Naturalization Act 1753 provoked such reactions
that it was repealed the next year. Nonconformists (Methodists and
Presbyterians) were only allowed to run for elections to the British House of
Commons in 1828, Catholics in 1829 (following the Catholic Relief Act 1829),
and Jews in 1858 (with the Emancipation of the Jews in England). Benjamin
Disraeli could only begin his political career in 1837 because he had been
converted to Anglicanism at the age of 12. In several states in the U.S. after
the Declaration of Independence, Jews, Quakers or Catholics were denied voting
rights and/or forbidden to run for office. The Delaware Constitution of 1776
stated that "Every person who shall be chosen a member of either house, or
appointed to any office or place of trust, before taking his seat, or entering
upon the execution of his office, shall (…) also make and subscribe the
following declaration, to wit: "I, A B. do profess faith in God the Father, and
in Jesus Christ His only Son, and in the Holy Ghost, one God, blessed for
evermore; and I do acknowledge the holy scriptures of the Old and New Testament
to be given by divine inspiration."". This was repealed by article I, section 2
of the 1792 Constitution: "No religious test shall be required as a
qualification to any office, or public trust, under this State.". The 1778
Constitution of the State of South Carolina stated that "No person shall be
eligible to sit in the house of representatives unless he be of the Protestant
religion", the 1777 Constitution of the State of Georgia (art. VI) that "The
representatives shall be chosen out of the residents in each county (…) and
they shall be of the Protestent "(sic)" religion". In Maryland, voting rights
and eligibility were extended to Jews in 1828. In Canada, several religious
groups (Mennonites, Hutterites, Doukhobors) were disenfranchised by the wartime
Elections Act of 1917, mainly because they opposed military service. This
disenfranchisement ended with the end of the First World War, but was renewed
for Doukhobors from 1934 ("Dominion Elections Act") to 1955. The first
Constitution of modern Romania in 1866 provided in article 7 that only
Christians could become Romanian citizens. Jews native to Romania were declared
stateless persons. In 1879, under pressure of the Berlin Peace Conference, this
article was amended granting non-Christians the right to become Romanian
citizens, but naturalization was granted on a case-by-case basis and was
subject to Parliamentary approval. An application took over ten years to
process. Only in 1923 was a new constitution adopted, whose article 133
extended Romanian citizenship to all Jewish residents and equality of rights to
all Romanian citizens. In the Republic of Maldives, only Muslim citizens have
voting rights and are eligible for parliamentary elections. On 25 November
2011, the UN human rights chief called on Maldivian authorities to remove the
discriminatory constitutional provision that requires every citizen to be a
Muslim. Wealth, tax class, social class. Until the nineteenth century, many
Western democracies had property qualifications in their electoral laws; e.g.
only landowners could vote (because the only tax for such countries was the
property tax), or the voting rights were weighed according to the amount of
taxes paid (as in the Prussian three-class franchise). Most countries abolished
the property qualification for national elections in the late nineteenth
century, but retained it for local government elections for several decades.
Today these laws have largely been abolished, although the homeless may not be
able to register because they lack regular addresses. In the United Kingdom,
until the House of Lords Act 1999, peers who were members of the House of Lords
were excluded from voting for the House of Commons because they were not
commoners. In Britain and some other monarchies, the sovereign is ineligible to
vote in parliamentary elections. Knowledge. Sometimes the right to vote has
been limited to people who had achieved a certain level of education or passed
a certain test, e.g. "literacy tests" in some states of the US. Age. All modern
democracies require voters to meet age qualifications to vote. Worldwide voting
ages are not consistent, differing between countries and even within counties,
usually between 16 and 21 years. Demeny voting would extend voting rights to
everyone including children regardless of age. Criminality. Many countries
restrict the voting rights of convicted criminals. Some countries, and some
U.S. states, also deny the right to vote to those convicted of serious crimes
after they are released from prison. In some cases (e.g. the felony
disenfranchisement laws found in many U.S. states) the denial of the right to
vote is automatic on a felony conviction; in other cases (e.g. France and
Germany) deprivation of the vote is meted out separately, often limited to
certain crimes such as those against the electoral system. In the Republic of
Ireland, prisoners are allowed the right to vote, following the "Hirst v UK
(No2)" ruling, and this was granted in 2006. Canada allowed only prisoners
serving a term of less than 2 years the right to vote, but this was found
unconstitutional in 2002 by the Supreme Court of Canada in "Sauvé v. Canada
(Chief Electoral Officer)", and all prisoners were allowed to vote as of the
2004 Canadian federal election. Residency. Under certain electoral systems
elections are held within subnational jurisdictions, preventing persons who
would otherwise be eligible from voting because they do not reside within such
a jurisdiction, or because they live in an area which cannot participate. In
the United States, residents of Washington, DC receive no voting representation
in Congress, although they have (de facto) full representation in presidential
elections. Residents of Puerto Rico have neither. Sometimes citizens become
ineligible to vote because they are no longer resident in their country of
citizenship. For example, Australian citizens who have been outside Australia
more than one and less than six years may excuse themselves from the
requirement to vote in Australian elections while they remain outside Australia
(voting in Australia is compulsory for resident citizens). In some cases, a
certain period of residence in a locality may required for the right to vote in
that location. For example, in the United Kingdom up to 2001, each 15 February
a new electoral register came into effect, based on registration as of the
previous 10 October, with the effect of limiting voting to those resident five
to seventeen months earlier depending on the timing of the election.
Nationality. In most countries, suffrage is limited to citizens and, in many
cases, permanent residents of that country. However, some members of supra-
national organisations such as the Commonwealth of Nations and the European
Union have given voting rights to citizens of all countries within that
organisation. Until the mid-twentieth century, many Commonwealth countries gave
the vote to all British citizens in the country, regardless of whether they
were normally resident there. In most cases this was because there was no
distinction between British and local citizenship. Several countries qualified
this with restrictions preventing non-white British citizens such as Indians
and British Africans from voting. Under European Union law, citizens of
European Union countries can vote in each other's local and European Parliament
elections on the same basis as citizens of the country in question.
Naturalization. In some countries, naturalized citizens do not enjoy the right
of vote and/or to be candidate, either permanently or for a determined period.
Article 5 of the 1831 Belgian Constitution made a difference between ordinary
naturalization, and "grande naturalisation". Only (former) foreigners who had
been granted "grande naturalisation" were entitled to vote or be candidate for
parliamentary elections or to be appointed as minister. However, ordinary
naturalized citizens could vote for municipal elections. Ordinary naturalized
citizens and citizens who had acquired Belgian nationality through marriage
were only admitted to vote, but not to be candidate, for parliamentary
elections in 1976. The concepts of ordinary and grande naturalization were
suppressed from the Constitution in 1991. In France, the 1889 Nationality Law
barred those who had acquired the French nationality by naturalization or
marriage from voting, eligibility and access to several public jobs. In 1938
the delay was reduced to 5 years. These discriminations, as well as others
against naturalized citizens, were gradually abolished in 1973 (9 January 1973
law) and 1983. In Morocco, a former French protectorate, and in Guinea, a
former French colony, naturalized citizens are prohibited from voting for 5
years after their naturalization. In the Federated States of Micronesia,
Micronesian citizenship for a minimum of 15 years is an eligibility condition
to be elected to the parliament. In Nicaragua, Peru and the Philippines, only
citizens by birth are eligible for being elected to the national legislature;
naturalized citizens enjoy only voting rights. In Uruguay, naturalized citizens
have the right of eligibility to the parliament after 5 years. In the United
States, the President and Vice President must be natural-born citizens. All
other governmental offices may be held by any citizen, although citizens may
only run for Congress after an extended period of citizenship (seven years for
the House of Representatives and nine for the Senate). Function. In France, an
1872 law, rescinded only by a 1945 decree, prohibited all army personnel from
voting. In the United Kingdom, public servants have to resign before running
for an election. The 1876 Constitution of Texas (article VI, section 1) stated
that "The following classes of persons shall not be allowed to vote in this
State, to wit: (…) Fifth--All soldiers, marines and seamen, employed in the
service of the army or navy of the United States.". Most countries that
exercise separation of powers forbid a person to be a legislator and government
official at the same time. Such provisions are found, for example, in Article I
of the U.S. Constitution. History of suffrage around the world. Finland was the
first nation in the world to give all adult citizens full suffrage, in other
words the right to vote and to run for office (in 1906). New Zealand was the
first country in the world to grant all adult citizens the right to vote (in
1893), but women did not get the right to run for the New Zealand legislature
until 1919. Hong Kong. Minimum age to vote was reduced from 21 to 18 years in
1995. According to the Basic Law, the constitution of the territory since 1997,
stipulates that all permanent residents (a status conferred by birth or by
seven years of residence) have the right to vote. The right of permanent
residents who have right of abode in other countries to stand in election is,
however, restricted to 12 functional constituencies by the Legislative Council
Ordinance of 1997. The right to vote and the right to stand in elections are
not equal. Less than 250,000 of the electorate are eligible to run in the 30
functional constituencies, of which 23 are elected by less than 80,000 of the
electorate, and in the 2008 Legislative Council election 14 members were
elected unopposed from these functional constituencies. The size of the
electorates of some constituencies are less than 200. Only people who can
demonstrate a connection to the sector are eligible to run in a functional
constituency. The Legislative Council (Amendment) Bill 2012, if passed, will
amend the Legislative Council Ordinance to restrict the right to stand in
Legislative Council by-elections in geographical constituencies and the
District Council (Second) functional constituency. In addition to people who
are mentally disabled, bankrupted or imprisoned, members who resigned from
their seats will not have the right to stand within six months' time from their
resignation. The bill is currently passing through the committee stage. United
Kingdom. King Henry VI of England established in 1432 that only male owners of
property worth at least forty shillings, a significant sum, were entitled to
vote in a county. The rules for boroughs were complex, but also restrictive.
Changes were made to the details of the system, but there was no major reform
until the Reform Act 1832. Suffrage in Scotland, an independent state until
1707, was also restricted. Suffrage in the United Kingdom was slowly changed
over the course of the 19th and 20th centuries through the use of the Reform
Acts and the Representation of the People Acts, culminating in universal
suffrage, excluding children and convicted prisoners. Etymology. The word
"suffrage" comes from Latin "suffragium", meaning "vote", "political support",
and "the right to vote". The etymology of the Latin word is uncertain, with
some sources citing Latin "suffragari" "lend support, vote for someone", from
"sub" "under" + "fragor" "crash, din, shouts (as of approval)", related to
"frangere" "to break" (related to "fraction"). Other sources say that attempts
to connect "suffragium" with "fragor" cannot be taken seriously. Some
etymologists think that it may be related to "suffrago" and may have originally
meant an ankle bone or knuckle bone.
