Sunk costs In economics and business decision-making, sunk costs are
retrospective (past) costs that have already been incurred and cannot be
recovered. Sunk costs are sometimes contrasted with "prospective costs", which
are future costs that may be incurred or changed if an action is taken. Both
retrospective and prospective costs may be either fixed (continuous for as long
as the business is in operation and unaffected by output volume) or variable
(dependent on volume) costs. Note, however, that many economists consider it a
mistake to classify sunk costs as "fixed" or "variable." For example, if a firm
sinks $1 million on an enterprise software installation, that cost is "sunk"
because it was a one-time thing and cannot be recovered once expended. A
"fixed" cost would be monthly payments made as part of a service contract or
licensing deal with the company that set up the software. The upfront
irretrievable payment for the installation should "not" be deemed a "fixed"
cost, with its cost spread out over time. Sunk costs should be kept separate.
The "Variable costs" for this project might include CPU usage, etc. In
traditional microeconomic theory, only prospective (future) costs are relevant
to an investment decision. Traditional economics proposes that an economic
actor not let sunk costs influence one's decisions, because doing so would not
be rationally assessing a decision exclusively on its own merits. The decision-
maker may make rational decisions according to their own incentives; these
incentives may dictate different decisions than would be dictated by efficiency
or profitability, and this is considered an "incentive problem" and distinct
from a sunk cost problem. Evidence from behavioral economics suggests this
theory fails to predict real-world behavior. Sunk costs do, in fact, influence
actors' decisions because humans are prone to loss-averse and framing effects,
and in light of such cognitive quirks, it is unsurprising that people
frequently fail to behave in ways that economists would deem "rational." Sunk
costs should not affect the rational decision-maker's best choice. However,
until a decision-maker irreversibly commits resources, the prospective cost is
an avoidable future cost and is properly included in any decision-making
processes. For example, if one is considering preordering movie tickets, but
has not actually purchased them yet, the cost remains avoidable. If the price
of the tickets rises to an amount that requires him to pay more than the value
he places on them, he should figure the change in prospective cost into the
decision-making and re-evaluate his decision. Description. The sunk cost is
distinct from economic loss. For example, when a car is purchased, it can
subsequently be resold; however, it will probably not be resold for the
original purchase price. The economic loss is the difference (including
transaction costs). The sum originally paid should not affect any rational
future decision-making about the car, regardless of the resale value: if the
owner can derive more value from selling the car than not selling it, then it
should be sold, regardless of the price paid. In this sense, the sunk cost is
not a precise quantity, but an economic term for a sum paid, in the past, which
is no longer relevant to decisions about the future; it may be used
inconsistently in quantitative terms as the original cost or the expected
economic loss. It may also be used as shorthand for an error in analysis due to
the sunk cost fallacy, irrational decision-making or, most simply, as
irrelevant data. In either case, the ticket-buyer has "paid the price of the
ticket" so "that" part of the decision no longer affects the future. This
generally shows a lack of planning, and often, intelligence. If the ticket-
buyer regrets buying the ticket, the current decision should be based on
whether he wants to see the movie at all, regardless of the price, just as if
he were to go to a free movie. The economist will suggest that, since the
second option involves suffering in only one way (spent money), while the first
involves suffering in two (spent money plus wasted time), option two is
obviously preferable. Sunk costs may cause cost overrun. In business, an
example of sunk costs may be investment into a factory or research that now has
a lower value or no value whatsoever. For example, $20 million has been spent
on building a power plant; the value at present is zero because it is
incomplete (and no sale or recovery is feasible). The plant can be completed
for an additional $10 million, or abandoned and a different but equally
valuable facility built for $5 million. It should be obvious that abandonment
and construction of the alternative facility is the more rational decision,
even though it represents a total loss of the original expenditure—the
original sum invested is a sunk cost. If decision-makers are irrational or have
the wrong incentives, the completion of the project may be chosen. For example,
politicians or managers may have more incentive to avoid the appearance of a
total loss. In practice, there is considerable ambiguity and uncertainty in
such cases, and decisions may in retrospect appear irrational that were, at the
time, reasonable to the economic actors involved and in the context of their
own incentives. Behavioral economics recognizes that sunk costs often affect
economic decisions due to loss aversion: the price paid becomes a benchmark for
the value, whereas the price paid should be irrelevant. This is considered
irrational behavior (as rationality is defined by classical economics).
Economic experiments have shown that the sunk cost fallacy and loss aversion
are common; hence economic rationality—as assumed by much of economics—is
limited. This has enormous implications for finance, economics, and securities
markets in particular. Daniel Kahneman won the Nobel Prize in Economics in part
for his extensive work in this area with his collaborator, Amos Tversky.
Features characterizing the sunk cost heuristic. Overly optimistic probability
bias. In 1968 Knox and Inkster, in what is perhaps the classic sunk cost
experiment, approached 141 horse bettors: 72 of the people had just finished
placing a $2.00 bet within the past 30 seconds, and 69 people were about to
place a $2.00 bet in the next 30 seconds. Their hypothesis was that people who
had just committed themselves to a course of action (betting $2.00) would
reduce post-decision dissonance by believing more strongly than ever that they
had picked a winner. Knox and Inkster asked the bettors to rate their horse's
chances of winning on a 7-point scale. What they found was that people who were
about to place a bet rated the chance that their horse would win at an average
of 3.48 which corresponded to a "fair chance of winning" whereas people who had
just finished betting gave an average rating of 4.81 which corresponded to a
"good chance of winning". Their hypothesis was confirmed: after making a $2.00
commitment, people became more confident their bet would pay off. Knox and
Inkster performed an ancillary test on the patrons of the horses themselves and
managed (after normalization) to repeat their finding almost identically.
Additional evidence of inflated probability estimations can be found in Arkes
and Blumer (1985) and Arkes & Hutzel (2000). Requisite of personal
responsibility. In a study of 96 business students in 1976 Staw and Fox gave
the subjects a choice between making an R&D investment in either an
underperforming company department, or in other sections of the hypothetical
company. Staw and Fox divided the participants into two groups; a low
responsibility condition and a high responsibility condition. In the high
responsibility condition the participants were told that they as manager had
made an earlier, disappointing R&D investment. In the low responsibility
condition, subjects were told that a former manager had made a previous R&D
investment in the underperforming division and were given the same profit data
as the other group. In both cases subjects were then asked to make a new $20
million investment. There was a significant interaction between assumed
responsibility and average investment, with the high responsibility condition
averaging $12.97 million and the low condition averaging $9.43 million. Similar
results have been obtained in earlier studies by Staw (1974, 1976) and by Arkes
and Blumer (1985) and Whyte (1986). Loss aversion and the sunk cost fallacy.
Many people have strong misgivings about "wasting" resources (loss aversion).
In the above example involving a non-refundable movie ticket, many people, for
example, would feel obliged to go to the movie despite not really wanting to,
because doing otherwise would be wasting the ticket price; they feel they've
passed the point of no return. This is sometimes referred to as the "sunk cost
fallacy". Economists would label this behavior "irrational": it is inefficient
because it misallocates resources by depending on information that is
irrelevant to the decision being made. Colloquially, this is known as "throwing
good money after bad". This line of thinking, in turn, may reflect a non-
standard measure of utility, which is ultimately subjective and unique to the
consumer. A ticket-buyer who purchases a ticket to a bad movie in advance makes
a semi-public commitment to watching it. To leave early is to make this lapse
of judgment manifest to strangers, an appearance he might otherwise choose to
avoid. Alternatively, he may take pride in having recognized the opportunity
cost of the alternative use of time. The idea of sunk costs is often employed
when analyzing business decisions. A common example of a sunk cost for a
business is the promotion of a brand name. This type of marketing incurs costs
that cannot normally be recovered. It is not typically possible to later
"demote" one's brand names in exchange for cash. A second example is R&D costs.
Once spent, such costs are sunk and should have no effect on future pricing
decisions. So a pharmaceutical company’s attempt to justify high prices
because of the need to recoup R&D expenses is fallacious. The company will
charge market prices whether R&D had cost one dollar or one million dollars.
However, R&D costs, and the ability to recoup those costs, are a factor in
deciding whether to spend the money on R&D. The sunk cost fallacy is in game
theory sometimes known as the "Concorde Fallacy", referring to the fact that
the British and French governments continued to fund the joint development of
Concorde even after it became apparent that there was no longer an economic
case for the aircraft. The project was regarded privately by the British
government as a "commercial disaster" which should never have been started, and
was almost cancelled, but political and legal issues had ultimately made it
impossible for either government to pull out. Sunk cost dilemma. The economic
approach that sunk costs should not be considered when decisions are being made
can lead to a situation where the sum of a number of good decisions can lead to
one big disaster. This dilemma situation can be described using a game theory
approach for 1-player games. The sunk cost dilemma with its sequence of good
decisions should not be confused with the sunk cost fallacy, where a
misconception of sunk costs can lead to bad decisions. Bygones principle. The
"bygones principle" is an economic theory used in business. Economists stress
the "extra" or "marginal" costs and benefits of every decision. The theory
emphasizes the importance of ignoring past costs and only taking into account
the future costs and benefits when making decisions. It states that when making
a decision, one should make a hard-headed calculation of the extra costs one
will incur and weigh these against its extra advantages.
