Sunspots (economics) In economics, the term sunspots (or sometimes "a sunspot")
usually refers to an "extrinsic" random variable, that is, a random variable
that does not directly affect economic fundamentals (such as endowments,
preferences, or technology). "Sunspots" can also refer to the related concept
of extrinsic uncertainty, that is, economic uncertainty that does not come from
variation in economic fundamentals. David Cass and Karl Shell also coined the
term "sunspots" as a suggestive and less technical way of saying "extrinsic
random variable". Use. The idea that arbitrary changes in expectations might
influence the economy, even if they bear no relation to fundamentals, is
controversial but has been widespread in many areas of economics. For example,
in the words of Arthur C. Pigou, 'Sunspots' have been included in economic
models as a way of capturing these 'extrinsic' fluctuations, in fields like
asset pricing, financial crises, business cycles, economic growth, and monetary
policy. Experimental economics researchers have demonstrated how sunspots could
affect economic activity. The name is a whimsical reference to 19th-century
economist William Stanley Jevons, who attempted to correlate business cycle
patterns with sunspot counts (on the actual sun) on the grounds that they might
cause variations in weather and thus agricultural output. Subsequent studies
have found no evidence for the hypothesis that the sun influences the business
cycle. On the other hand, sunny weather has a small but significant positive
impact on stock returns, probably due to its impact on traders' moods. Sunspot
equilibrium. In economics, a sunspot equilibrium is an economic equilibrium
where the market outcome or allocation of resources varies in a way unrelated
to economic fundamentals. In other words, the outcome depends on an "extrinsic"
random variable, meaning a random influence that matters only because people
think it matters. The sunspot equilibrium concept was defined by David Cass and
Karl Shell. Origin of terminology. While Cass and Shell's 1983 paper defined
the term sunspot in the context of general equilibrium, their use of the term
sunspot (a term originally used in astronomy) alludes to the earlier
econometric work of William Stanley Jevons, who explored the correlation
between the degree of sunspot activity and the price of corn. In Jevons' work,
uncertainty about sunspots could be considered intrinsic, for example, if
sunspots have some demonstrable effect on agricultural productivity, or some
other relevant variable. In modern economics, the term does not indicate any
relationship with solar phenomena, and is instead used to describe random
variables that have no impact on the preferences, allocations, or production
technology of a general equilibrium model. The modern theory suggests that such
a nonfundamental variable might have an effect on equilibrium outcomes if it
influences expectations. Cass and Shell refer to Keynes' "animal spirits", and
to the notion of self-fulfilling prophecy to illuminate their use of the term
"extrinsic uncertainty". Formally however they define it as any variable that
does not directly affect the fundamentals of the economy. Occurrence of
equilibria. Much work on sunspot equilibria aims to prove the possible
existence of equilibria differing from a given model's competitive equilibria,
which can result from various types of extrinsic uncertainty. The sunspot
equilibrium framework supplies a basis for rational expectations modeling of
excess volatility (volatility resulting from sources other than randomness in
the economic fundamentals). Proper sunspot equilibria can exist in a number of
economic situations, including asymmetric information, externalities in
consumption or production, imperfect competition, incomplete markets, and
restrictions on market participation.
