Supply-side economics Supply-side economics is a school of macroeconomic
thought that argues that economic growth can be most effectively created by
lowering barriers for people to produce (supply) goods and services, such as
lowering income tax and capital gains tax rates, and by allowing greater
flexibility by reducing regulation. According to supply-side economics,
consumers will then benefit from a greater supply of goods and services at
lower prices. Typical policy recommendations of supply-side economists are
lower marginal tax rates and less regulation. The Laffer curve embodies a tenet
of supply side economics: that government tax revenues are the same at 100% tax
rates as at 0% tax rates. The tax rate that achieves highest government
revenues is somewhere in between. Whether it is worth the corresponding
decrease in economic growth that is often assumed by supply-side economists to
accompany such a rate increase is a policy question. The term "supply-side
economics" was thought, for some time, to have been coined by journalist Jude
Wanniski in 1975, but according to Robert D. Atkinson's "Supply-Side Follies",
the term "supply side" ("supply-side fiscalists") was first used by Herbert
Stein, a former economic adviser to President Nixon, in 1976, and only later
that year was this term repeated by Jude Wanniski. Its use connotes the ideas
of economists Robert Mundell and Arthur Laffer. Today, supply-side economics is
likened by critics to "trickle-down economics". Historical origins. Supply-side
economics developed during the 1970s in response to Keynesian economic policy,
and in particular the failure of demand management to stabilize Western
economies during the stagflation of the 1970s, in the wake of the oil crisis in
1973. It drew on a range of non-Keynesian economic thought, particularly the
Chicago School and Neo-Classical School. An advocate of supply-side economics
traced the school of thought's intellectual descent from the philosophers Ibn
Khaldun and David Hume, satirist Jonathan Swift, political economist Adam
Smith, and even Founding Father Alexander Hamilton. However what most separates
supply-side economics as a modern phenomenon is its argument in favor of a low
tax rate for primarily collective and notably working-class reasons, rather
than traditional ideological ones. The difference is an important one.
Classical Liberals opposed taxes because they opposed government, taxation
being the latter's most obvious form. Their claim was that each man had a right
to himself and his property and therefore taxation was immoral and of
questionable legal grounding. Supply-side economists, on the other hand, argued
that the alleged collective benefit (i.e jobs) provided the main impetus for
tax cuts. As in classical economics, supply-side economics proposed that
production or supply is the key to economic prosperity and that consumption or
demand is merely a secondary consequence. Early on this idea had been
summarized in Say's Law of economics, which states: "A product is no sooner
created, than it, from that instant, affords a market for other products to the
full extent of its own value." John Maynard Keynes, the founder of
Keynesianism, summarized Say's Law as "supply creates its own demand." He
turned Say's Law on its head in the 1930s by declaring that demand creates its
own supply. However, Say's Law does not state that production creates a demand
for the product itself, but rather a demand for ""other products to the full
extent of its own value"." A better formulation of the law is that the supply
of one good constitutes demand for one or more other goods. This requires that
the original good has some value to another party and it is through willingness
to trade this value that the producer of the new good can express his demand
for another good. In 1978, Jude Wanniski published "The Way the World Works",
in which he laid out the central thesis of supply-side economics and detailed
the failure of high tax-rate progressive income tax systems and U.S. monetary
policy under Nixon in the 1970s. Wanniski advocated lower tax rates and a
return to some kind of gold standard, similar to the 1944-1971 Bretton Woods
System that Nixon abandoned. In 1983, economist Victor Canto, a disciple of
Arthur Laffer, published "The Foundations of Supply-Side Economics". This
theory focuses on the effects of marginal tax rates on the incentive to work
and save, which affect the growth of the "supply side" or what Keynesians call
potential output. While the latter focus on changes in the rate of supply-side
growth in the long run, the "new" supply-siders often promised short-term
results. The supply-siders were influenced strongly by the idea of the Laffer
curve, which states that tax "rates" and tax "revenues" were distinct—that
tax rates too high or too low will not maximize tax revenues. Supply-siders
felt that in a high tax rate environment, lowering tax "rates" to the right
level can raise revenue by causing faster economic growth. This led the supply-
siders to advocate large reductions in marginal income and capital gains tax
rates to encourage allocation of assets to investment, which would produce more
supply. Jude Wanniski and many others advocate a zero capital gains rate. The
increased aggregate supply would result in increased aggregate demand, hence
the term "Supply-Side Economics". Furthermore, in response to inflation,
supply-siders called for indexed marginal income tax rates, as monetary
inflation had pushed wage earners into higher marginal income tax brackets that
remained static; that is, as wages increased to maintain purchasing power with
prices, income tax brackets were not adjusted accordingly and thus wage earners
were pushed into higher income tax brackets than tax policy had intended.
Supply-side economics has been criticized as essentially politically
conservative. Supply-side advocates claim that they are not following an
ideology, but are reinstating classical economics. Yet, supply-siders such as
Jude Wanniski have argued for lower tax rates to increase tax revenues, and
that redistribution of income through taxation was essential to the health of
the polity—a view that is anathema to traditional conservatives. Some
economists see similarities between supply-side proposals and Keynesian
economics. If the result of changes to the tax structure is a fiscal deficit
then the 'supply-side' policy is effectively stimulating demand through the
Keynesian multiplier effect. Supply-side proponents would point out, in
response, that the level of taxation and spending is important for economic
incentives, not just the size of the deficit. The Reagan administration and the
Kennedy administration both justified such changes in socioeconomic terms by
invoking the old saying that "a rising tide lifts all boats". Marx and Smith.
Both supply-siders and their opponents have been keen to claim the mantles of
thinkers as diverse as Karl Marx and Adam Smith. Jude Wanniski has claimed both
as supply-side thinkers due to their advocacy of a gold monetary standard and
more specifically their focus on the agents of production in an economy. Barton
Biggs, chief investment strategist of Morgan Stanley, described Wanniski's book
about supply-side economics, "The Way the World Works", as the "most important"
economic book published since Marx's writings. Fiscal policy theory. Supply-
side economics holds that increased taxation steadily reduces economic trade
between economic participants within a nation and that it discourages
investment. Taxes act as a type of trade barrier or tariff that causes economic
participants to revert to less efficient means of satisfying their needs. As
such, higher taxation leads to lower levels of specialization and lower
economic efficiency. The idea is said to be illustrated by the Laffer curve.
(Case & Fair, 1999: 780, 781). Crucial to the operation of supply-side theory
is the expansion of free trade and free movement of capital. It is argued that
free capital movement, in addition to the classical reasoning of comparative
advantage, frequently allows an economic expansion. Lowering tax barriers to
trade provides to the domestic economy all the advantages that the
international economy gets from lower tariff barriers. Supply-side economists
have less to say on the effects of deficits, and sometimes cite Robert
Barro’s work that states that rational economic actors will buy bonds in
sufficient quantities to reduce long term interest rates. Critics argue that
standard exchange rate theory would predict, instead, a devaluation of the
currency of the nation running the high budget deficit, and eventual "crowding
out" of private investment. According to Mundell, "Fiscal discipline is a
learned behavior." To put it another way, eventually the unfavourable effects
of running persistent budget deficits will force governments to reduce spending
in line with their levels of revenue. This view is also promoted by Victor
Canto. The central issue at stake is the point of diminishing returns on
liquidity in the investment sector: Is there a point where additional money is
"pushing on a string"? To the supply-side economist, reallocation away from
consumption to private investment, and most especially from public investment
to private investment, will always yield superior economic results. In standard
monetarist and Keynesian theory, however, there will be a point where increases
in asset prices will produce no new supply. A point where investment demand
outruns potential investment supply, and produce instead asset inflation, or in
common terms a bubble. The existence of this point, and where it is should it
exist, is the essential question of the efficacy of supply-side economics.
Effect on tax revenues. Many early proponents argued that the size of the
economic growth would be significant enough that the increased government
revenue from a faster growing economy would be sufficient to compensate
completely for the short-term costs of a tax cut, and that tax cuts could, in
fact, cause overall revenue to increase. Some hold this was borne out during
the 1980s when, advocates of supply-side economics claim, tax cuts ultimately
led to an overall increase in governmental revenue due to stronger economic
growth. Other economists, however, dispute this assertion. Although the term
"supply-side economics" may have been coined later, an example of lower tax
cuts effecting higher government revenues occurred during the 1920s. Tax rates
fell from 60% to 25% for the highest brackets (those earning over $100,000)
between 1920 and 1928, yet the income paid by those categories grew from $321
million to $714 million. During this period, the highest bracket changed from
paying roughly 30% of all income taxes to 61%, and the lowest bracket (under
$5,000) went from about 15% to 1%. Although this does not correlate taxes to
other policies, it does illustrate that tax cuts are viable as part of a plan
to stimulate higher revenue. Some contemporary economists do not consider
supply-side economics a tenable economic theory, with Alan Blinder calling it
an "ill-fated" and perhaps "silly" school on the pages of a 2006 textbook. Greg
Mankiw, former chairman of President George W. Bush's Council of Economic
Advisors, offered similarly sharp criticism of the school in the early editions
of his introductory economics textbook. In a 1992 article for the Harvard
International Review, James Tobin wrote, " idea that tax cuts would actually
increase revenues turned out to deserve the ridicule…" Supply side proponents
Trabandt and Uhlig argue that "static scoring overestimates the revenue loss
for labor and capital tax cuts", and that instead "dynamic scoring" is a better
predictor for the effects of tax cuts. To address these criticisms, in 2003 the
Congressional Budget Office conducted a dynamic scoring analysis of tax cuts
advocated by supply advocates; Two of the nine models used in the study
predicted a large improvement in the deficit over the next ten years resulting
from tax cuts and the other seven models did not. U.S. monetary and fiscal
experience. Reaganomics. Ronald Reagan made supply-side economics a household
phrase, and promised an across-the-board reduction in income tax rates and an
even larger reduction in capital gains tax rates. (Case & Fair, 1999: 781,
782). When vying for the Republican party presidential nomination for the 1980
election, George H.W. Bush derided Reagan's supply-side policies as "voodoo
economics". However, later he seemed to give lip service to these policies to
secure the Republican nomination in 1988, and is speculated by some to have
lost in his re-election bid in 1992 by allowing tax increases. (See: "".) In
the United States, commentators frequently equate supply-side economics with
Reaganomics. The fiscal policies of Ronald Reagan were largely based on supply-
side economics. During Reagan's 1980 presidential campaign, the key economic
concern was double digit inflation, which Reagan described as "Too many dollars
chasing too few goods", but rather than the usual dose of tight money,
recession and layoffs, with their consequent loss of production and wealth, he
promised a gradual and painless way to fight inflation by "producing our way
out of it". Switching from an earlier monetarist policy, Federal Reserve chair
Paul Volcker began a policy of tighter monetary policies such as lower money
supply growth to break the inflationary psychology and squeeze inflationary
expectations out of the economic system. Therefore, supply-side supporters
argue, "Reaganomics" was only partially based on supply-side economics.
However, under Reagan, Congress passed a plan that would slash taxes by $749
billion over five years. As a result, Jason Hymowitz cited Reagan—along with
Jack Kemp—as a great advocate for supply-side economics in politics and
repeatedly praised his leadership. Critics of "Reaganomics" claim it failed to
produce much of the exaggerated gains some supply-siders had promised. Krugman
later summarized the situation: "When Ronald Reagan was elected, the supply-
siders got a chance to try out their ideas. Unfortunately, they failed."
Although he credited supply-side economics for being more successful than
monetarism which he claimed "left the economy in ruins", he stated that supply-
side economics produced results which fell "so far short of what it promised,"
describing the supply-side theory as "free lunches". Krugman and other critics
point to increased budget deficits during the Reagan administration as proof
that the Laffer Curve is wrong. Supply-side advocates claim that revenues
increased, but that spending increased faster. However, they typically point to
total revenues even though it was only income taxes rates that were cut while
other taxes, notably payroll taxes were raised. That table also does not
account for inflation. For example, of the increase from $600.6 billion in 1983
to $666.5 billion in 1984, $26 billion is due to inflation, $18.3 billion to
corporate taxes and $21.4 billion to social insurance revenues (mostly FICA
taxes). Income tax revenues in constant dollars decreased by $2.77 billion in
that year. Supply-siders cannot legitimately take credit for increased FICA tax
revenue, because in 1983 FICA tax rates were increased from 6.7% to 7% and the
ceiling was raised by $2,100. For the self employed, the FICA tax rate went
from 9.35% to 14%. The FICA tax rate increased throughout Reagan's term, and
rose to 7.51% in 1988 and the ceiling was raised by 61% through Reagan's two
terms. Those tax hikes on wage earners, along with inflation, are the source of
the revenue gains of the early 1980s. It has been contended by some supply-side
critics that the argument to lower taxes to increase revenues was a smokescreen
for "starving" the government of revenues, in the hope that the tax cuts would
lead to a commensurate drop in government spending. However, this did not turn
out to be the case on the spending side; Paul Samuelson called this notion "the
tape worm theory—the idea that the way to get rid of a tape worm is stab your
patient in the stomach". Reagan himself gave credence to Samuelson’s argument
when he used this analogy, “We can lecture our children about extravagance
until we run out of voice and breath. Or we can cure their extravagance by
simply reducing their allowance.” There was a second smokescreen as well,
closely related to the first. If there was not a drop in total government
spending, what Reagan did achieve was to not only move the national debate to
the right of center but to move the center itself. So, for his eight years and
most of the period since then, political battles have been fought on the
conservatives’ turf. How much or how little to cut Federal programs became
the issue du jour. Efforts to prevent draconian cuts in discretionary programs
for the poor, such as a campaign in the early 1980s by mainline Protestant
denominations under the banner, “The Poor Have Suffered Enough,” quickly
discovered this. To this day, subsequent similar attempts to increase or
restore funds for these programs only confirmed the political lesson these
church bodies learned, that the repositioning of where the battle would be
joined may have been Reagan’s greatest domestic achievement. Supply-side
advocates like Wanniski counter that social and fiscal conservatives who
supported the supply-side prescription on tax policy for this reason were
misguided and did not understand the Laffer Curve. Research since 2000. In
2003, Alan Murray, who at the time was Washington bureau chief for CNBC and a
co-host of the television program Capital Report, declared the debate over
supply-side economics to have ended "with a whimper" after extensive modeling
performed by the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) predicted that the revenue
generating effects of the specific tax cuts examined would be, in his words,
"relatively small." Murray also suggested that Dan Crippen may have lost his
chance at reappointment as head of the CBO over the dynamic scoring issue.
Nobel laureate economist Milton Friedman agreed the tax cuts would reduce tax
revenues and result in intolerable deficits, though he supported them as a
means to restrain federal spending. Friedman characterized the reduced
government tax revenue as "cutting their allowance". Later analysis of the Bush
tax cuts by the Economic Policy Institute claims that the Bush tax cuts have
failed to promote growth, as all macroeconomic growth indicators, save the
housing market, were well below average for the 2001 to 2005 business cycle.
These critics argue that the Bush tax cuts have done little more than deprive
government of revenue, and increase deficit and after-tax income inequality. In
the two years since that report, though, growth has remained strong, and newer
numbers dispute the conclusions of the EPI report. The Bush administration
points to the long period of sustained growth, both in GDP and in overall job
numbers, as well as increases in personal income and decreases in the
government deficit. The results of the tax cuts in the U.S. in 2001 and 2003
are mixed. While results show a temporary decline in tax receipts, they later
recovered due to economic growth. In this analysis, it is difficult to discern
the reason for the decreases in tax revenue because 2001 was the same year that
the dot-com bubble burst. Total Federal Revenues in FY2000 were $2.025 trillion
(in inflation adjusted dollars). In 2001, President George W. Bush signed the
Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2001. Rather than wait for
the start of the new fiscal year, income tax rate reductions started on July 1,
2001. In addition, rebate checks were sent to everyone that filed a 2000 income
tax return (before October 1, the start of the new federal fiscal year).
Federal revenues in FY2001 were $1.946 trillion, $79 billion lower than in
FY2000. More of the 2001 tax cut took effect at the start of FY2002, including
cuts in the estate tax, retirement and educational savings. Federal revenues in
FY2002 were $1.777 trillion, $247 billion lower than in FY2000. In 2003,
President Bush signed the Jobs and Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of
2003. Income tax rates were immediately reduced and rebate checks issued
(without waiting for the new fiscal year). Federal revenues in FY2003 were
$1.665 trillion, $360 billion lower than in FY2000. Federal revenues in FY2004
were 1.707 trillion, $318 billion lower than in FY2000. Federal revenues in
FY2005 were $1,888, $137 billion lower than in FY2000, but by 2006 revenue had
completely recovered (in inflation adjusted dollars), with receipts at $2.037
trillion, $12 billion higher than 2000. The cumulative total of federal
revenues less than in FY2000 for the fiscal years 2001-2005 was $1.142
trillion, with that amount expected to be recovered by 2011, with 2012 expected
to produce an additional $400 billion in excess revenue over 2000. Federal
revenues include revenue from different taxes that were cut, stayed the same,
or were raised. For example, the Social Security FICA tax rate stayed the same
while the maximum income subject to the tax was increased each year, resulting
in a tax increase for those earning more than the previous limit. Social
Security tax revenues increased each and every year. Including increasing tax
revenues from taxes that stayed the same or were increased hides the magnitude
of the revenue decrease in taxes that were cut. Income tax rates were cut and
income tax revenues were lower than the FY2000 level each and every fiscal year
from 2001–2005, a cumulative revenue decrease of $640 billion (measured in
nominal dollars). But, by 2006 revenues exceeded the 2000 level. Likewise
Corporate income tax rates were cut and revenues were lower than the FY2000
level each and every fiscal year from 2001-2004. But, by 2005 the inflation
adjusted take exceeded that of 2000 by over 20%, and by 2006 nearly 50% higher.
Since tax cuts took after a stock market crash, and their effects were
contemporaneous with both a recession and the 9/11 attacks, it's unclear
whether temporary decreases in government revenue were the result of those
cuts, or to other factors affecting the economy. In 2006, the CBO released a
study titled "A Dynamic Analysis of Permanent Extension of the President's Tax
Relief." This study found that under the best possible scenario, making tax
cuts permanent would increase the economy "over the long run" by 0.7%. Since
the "long run" is not defined, some commentators have suggested that 20 years
should be used, making the annual best case GDP growth equal to 0.04%. When
compared with the cost of the tax cuts, the best case growth scenario is still
not sufficient to pay for the tax cuts. Previous official CBO estimates had
identified the tax cuts as costing the equivalent of 1.4% of the GDP in
revenue. According to the study, if the best case growth scenario is applied,
the tax cuts would still cost the equivalent of 1.27% of the GDP. This study
was criticized by many economists, including Harvard Economics Professor Greg
Mankiw, who pointed out that the CBO used a very low value for the earnings-
weighted compensated labor supply elasticity of 0.14. In a paper published in
the Journal of Public Economics, Mankiw and Matthew Weinzierl noted that the
current economics research would place an appropriate value for labor supply
elasticity at around 0.5, although Dr. Mankiw notes, "unfortunately, the
academic literature on this topic is far from conclusive." In 2003, a
Congressional Budget Office study was conducted to forecast whether currently
proposed tax cuts would increase revenues. The study used dynamic scoring
models as supply side advocates had wanted and was conducted by a supply side
advocate. The majority of the models applied predicted that the proposed tax
cuts would not increase revenues. Criticisms. Critics of supply-side economics
point to the lack of academic economics credentials by movement leaders such as
Jude Wanniski and Robert Bartley to imply that the theories behind it are
bankrupt. David Harper and others dismiss the theory as offering "nothing
particularly new or controversial" to an updated view of classical economics.
Nobel prize winning economist Paul Krugman published a book dedicated to
attacking the theory, and Reaganomics, under the title "Peddling Prosperity".
Mundell in his The Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of
Alfred Nobel acceptance lecture (awarded for unrelated work in optimum currency
area) countered that the success of price stability was proof that the supply-
side revolution had worked. The continuing debate over supply-side policies
tends to focus on the massive federal and current account deficits, increased
income inequality and its failure to promote growth.  The Congressional Budget
Office (CBO) has estimated that extending the Bush tax cuts of 2001-2003 beyond
their 2010 expiration would increase deficits by $1.8 trillion dollars over the
following decade. The CBO also completed a study in 2005 analyzing a
hypothetical 10% income tax cut and concluded that under various scenarios
there would be minimal offsets to the loss of revenue. In other words, deficits
would increase by nearly the same amount as the tax cut in the first five
years, with limited feedback revenue thereafter. From time to time a politician
makes blunt claims that tax cuts increase government revenue (e.g. Mitch
McConnell in July 2010 ) However, the Laffer Curve reflects the hypothesis that
only cutting tax rates to the right of peak economic performance rate will
increase revenues, and that cutting tax rates to the left of the peak rate will
decrease revenues. The paradigm of a tax system which rewards investment over
consumption was accepted across the political spectrum, and no plan not rooted
in supply-side economic theories has been advanced in the United States since
1982 (with the exception of the Clinton tax increases of 1993) which had any
serious chance of passage into law. In 1986, a tax overhaul, described by
Mundell as "the completion of the supply-side revolution" was drafted. It
included increases in payroll taxes, decreases in top marginal rates, and
increases in capital gains taxes. Combined with the mortgage interest deduction
and the regressive effects of state taxation, it produces closer to a flat-tax
effect. Proponents, such as Mundell and Laffer, point to the dramatic rise in
the stock market as a sign that the tax overhaul was effective, although they
note that the hike in capital gains may be more trouble than it was worth.
Cutting marginal tax rates can also be perceived as primarily beneficial to the
wealthy, which commentators such as Paul Krugman see as politically rather than
economically motivated. The economist John Kenneth Galbraith noted that supply
side economics was not a new theory. He wrote, "Mr. David Stockman has said
that supply-side economics was merely a cover for the trickle-down approach to
economic policy—what an older and less elegant generation called the horse-
and-sparrow theory: If you feed the horse enough oats, some will pass through
to the road for the sparrows." Galbraith claimed that the horse and sparrow
theory was partly to blame for the Panic of 1896.
