Surplus value Surplus value is a concept written about by Karl Marx. Although
Marx did not himself invent the term, he developed the concept. For Marx, the
gigantic increase in wealth and population from the 19th century onwards was
mainly due to the competitive striving to obtain "maximum surplus-value from
the employment of labor", resulting in an equally gigantic increase of
productivity and capital resources. To the extent that increasingly the
economic surplus is convertible into money and expressed in money, the
amassment of wealth is possible on a larger and larger scale (see capital
accumulation and surplus product). Theory. Marx's solution was to distinguish
between labor-time worked and labor power. A worker who is sufficiently
productive can produce an output value greater than what it costs to hire him.
Although his wage seems to be based on hours worked, in an economic sense this
wage does not reflect the full value of what the worker produces. Effectively
it is not labour which the worker sells, but his capacity to work. Imagine a
worker who is hired for an hour and paid $10. Once in the capitalist's employ,
the capitalist can have him operate a boot-making machine using which the
worker produces $10 worth of work every fifteen minutes. Every hour, the
capitalist receives $40 worth of work and only pays the worker $10, capturing
the remaining $30 as gross revenue. Once the capitalist has deducted fixed and
variable operating costs of (say) $20 (leather, depreciation of the machine,
etc.), he is left with $10. Thus, for an outlay of capital of $30, the
capitalist obtains a surplus value of $10; his capital has not only been
replaced by the operation, but also has increased by $10. The worker cannot
capture this benefit directly because he has no claim to the means of
production (e.g. the boot-making machine) or to its products, and his capacity
to bargain over wages is restricted by laws and the supply/demand for wage
labour. Hence the rise of trade unions which aim to create a more favourable
bargaining position through collective action by workers. Definition. "Total"
surplus-value in an economy (Marx refers to the "mass" or volume of surplus-
value) is basically equal to the sum of net distributed and undistributed
profit, net interest, net rents, net tax on production and various net receipts
associated with royalties, licensing, leasing, certain honorariums etc. (see
also value product). Of course, the way generic profit income is grossed and
netted in social accounting may differ somewhat from the way an individual
business does that (see also Operating surplus). Marx's own discussion focuses
mainly on profit, interest and rent, largely ignoring taxation and royalty-type
fees which were proportionally very small components of the national income
when he lived. Over the last 150 years, however, the role of the state in the
economy increased in almost every country in the world. Around 1850, the
average share of government spending in GDP in the advanced capitalist
economies was around 5%; in 1870, a bit above 8%; on the eve of World War I,
just under 10%; just before the outbreak of World War II, around 20%; by 1950,
nearly 30%; and today the average is around 35-40%. (see for example Alan
Turner Peacock, "The growth of public expenditure", in "Encyclopedia of Public
Choice", Springer 2003, pp.Â 594-597). Interpretations. Surplus-value may be
viewed in five ways: Measures of the rate of surplus value. According to Marx's
theory of exploitation, living labour at an adequate level of productivity is
able to create and conserve more value than it costs the employer to buy; which
is exactly the economic reason why the employer buys it, i.e. to preserve and
augment the value of the capital at his command. Thus, the surplus-labour is
"unpaid" labour appropriated by employers in the form of work-time and outputs,
on the basis that employers own and supply the means of production worked with.
The commercial function of labour is only to conserve their value, add value to
them, and transfer value. According to Marx's labor theory of value, human
labor is the only source of net new economic value, but is also indispensable
for the conservation and transfer of economic value (maintenance and
redistribution of capital assets). Asset revaluations according to this theory
only "redistribute" claims to product-value which has already been created
previously. The "rate of surplus-value" in production is defined by Marx as the
volume of surplus-value "produced" by the workforce divided by the variable
capital (or labour-costs) expended to produce it (the ratio S/V). This is very
roughly equivalent to the profits/wages ratio, though there is debate in
Marxian economics about what exact profit and wage measures should be used.
After all, total labour costs often involve far more than wage payments, and
profits can be "grossed" and "netted" in different ways. The five measures of
the rate of surplus value mentioned do not all refer to the same thing exactly
(see further rate of exploitation and surplus product). However, the basic
meaning of the rate of surplus value is always the "rate of exploitation of
living labour-capacity", i.e. the net capital yield obtained from the
employment of living labour. Marx usually assumed in his models that the rate
of surplus-value would be the same in all industries, different rates being
equalised to a general norm in an open market for capital and labour. In
reality, this is probably not the case, i.e. the rates may vary. Some authors
have interpreted this "rate of exploitation" as a purely economic or commercial
concept (in the sense of "labor utilisation", the use of a resource) while
others see it primarily as a moral or political concept referring to the
domination of a social class which commands labour in virtue of ownership of
capital assets. Equalization of rates of surplus value. So, he assumed a
uniform rate of surplus value in his models of how surplus value would be
shared out under competitive conditions. Complicating factors in assessing
surplus-value. These phenomena often make it difficult to calculate what the
real net wage income is, and what the real net profit income is; there may be a
very significant difference between gross income and disposable income. In
modern society, the complexity of transactions can often seem almost
impenetrable or opaque. People may become less concerned with issues of
"exploitation", rather their concern may just simply be with defending their
entitlement to a secure real net income ("take home pay") from the work they
do, or from any other source. How the exchange between capital and labour
happens to be viewed, depends greatly on the balance of power between employers
and employees, and on the ability for all parties to the exchange to "make
gains" from the trade in human labor. People would not usually trade unless
they made a positive gain by it, but obviously the gains could be very
unequally distributed among different parties to the trade. The more real net
income capitalists and workers lose, the more concerned they become about fair
exchange and exploitation. Origin in trade. Surplus-value is not a fixed
category but a dialectical, developing one, because the forms in which new
value is created and appropriated, and the way the burdens of productive work
are shifted between strata of the population, change over time. There is
obviously a big difference between simple commodity producers exchanging
agricultural surpluses in a village market, and "fast money" in today's global
money markets. Historically, Marx argues, surplus-value originated "outside"
production in the first commercial forms of exchange - usury, merchant, rentier
and bank capital and their associated lending operations. In fact, when Marx
first introduces the concept of surplus value in Das Kapital, chapter 4, it is
in the context of an analysis of "buying commodities in order to sell them at a
profit", which he denotes as M-C-M' (see: "Capital Vol. 1", Penguin ed., p.
251). Thus, the first forms of surplus-value include (leaving aside extortion
and robbery etc.) profits from simple commodity production, merchants' profit
from "buying cheap and selling dear" or unequal exchange, certain types of rent
imposed on production, and interest on loans extended by financiers, bankers
and usurers. In Europe, "share" certificates of the joint-stock type date from
the 16th century, although in some or other form share-type financial
obligations already existed much earlier. In ancient and feudal society, the
ability to appropriate surplus-value from trade in commodities and capital was
usually strongly regulated, and limited by the state and religious authorities;
a universal market where almost everything could be bought and sold freely
using money did not exist. Originally, as Marx explicitly notes, commercial
trade emerged at the boundaries of economic communities based on a "non-
capitalist" mode of production, and it is only when commerce begins to dominate
and regulate the bulk of production itself, that it becomes clearer that the
ultimate source, or substance, of all surplus-value is really surplus-labour.
The processes whereby capitalist commerce conquers direct control of production
(instigating the capitalist mode of production) are however very lengthy and
complicated ones; all kinds of socio-economic obstacles ("market rigidities")
must be cleared away, and new institutions created, before all the necessary
factors of production can be freely bought and sold as inputs and outputs. A
good example of that is modern China. Appropriation from production. Both in
Das Kapital and in preparatory manuscripts such as the "Grundrisse" and
"Results of the immediate process of production", Marx shows how commerce by
stages transforms a non-capitalist production process into a capitalist
production process, integrating it fully into markets, so that all inputs and
outputs become marketed goods or services. When that process is complete, the
whole of production has become simultaneously a labor process creating use-
values and a valorisation process creating new value, and more specifically a
surplus-value appropriated as net income (see also capital accumulation). In
fact, Marx argues that the whole purpose of production in this situation
becomes the growth of capital, i.e. that production of output becomes
"conditional" on capital accumulation. If production becomes unprofitable,
capital will be withdrawn from production sooner or later. This means,
systemically, that the main driving force of capitalism becomes the quest to
maximise the appropriation of surplus-value augmenting the stock of capital.
The overriding motive behind efforts to economise resources and labor is to
obtain the maximum possible increase in income and capital assets ("business
growth"), and provide a steady or growing return on investment. Absolute vs.
relative. According to Marx, "absolute surplus value" is obtained by increasing
the amount of time worked per worker in an accounting period. Marx talks mainly
about the length of the working day or week, but in modern times the concern is
about the number of hours worked per year. In many parts of the world, as
productivity rose, the working classes forced a reduction in the workweek, from
60 hours to 50, 40 or 35 hours; but casualisation and flexibilisation of
working hours also permits higher paid workers to work less (a fact of concern
to statesmen who worry about international competitiveness, i.e. if we don't
work harder our country will lose business). The attempt to extract more and
more surplus-value from labor on the one side, and on the other side the
resistance to this exploitation, are according to Marx at the core of the
conflict between social classes, which is sometimes muted or hidden, but at
other times erupts in open class warfare and class struggle. Production versus
realisation. Marx distinguished sharply between value and price, in part
because of the sharp distinction he draws between the "production of surplus-
value" and the "realisation of profit income" (see also value-form). Output may
be "produced" containing surplus-value (valorisation), but "selling" that
output (realisation) is not at all an automatic process. Until payment from
sales is received, it is uncertain how much of the surplus-value produced will
actually be realised as profit from sales. So, the magnitude of "profit
realised" in the form of money and the magnitude of "surplus-value produced" in
the form of products may differ greatly, depending on what happens to market
prices and the vagaries of supply and demand fluctuations. This insight forms
the basis of Marx's theory of market value, prices of production and the
tendency of the rate of profit of different enterprises to be levelled out by
competition. In his published and unpublished manuscripts, Marx went into great
detail to examine many different factors which could affect the production and
realisation of surplus-value. He regarded this as crucial for the purpose of
understanding the dynamics and dimensions of capitalist competition, not just
business competition but also competition between capitalists and workers and
among workers themselves. But his analysis did not go much beyond specifying
some of the overall outcomes of the process. His main conclusion though is that
employers will aim to maximise the productivity of labour and economise on the
use of labour, to reduce their unit-costs and maximise their net returns from
sales at current market prices; at a given ruling market price for an output,
every reduction of costs and every increase in productivity and sales turnover
will increase profit income for that output. The main method is
"mechanisation", which raises the fixed capital outlay in investment. In turn,
this causes the unit-values of commodities to decline over time, and a "decline
of the average rate of profit" in the sphere of production occurs, culminating
in a crisis of capital accumulation, in which a sharp reduction in productive
investments combines with mass unemployment, followed by an intensive
rationalisation process of take-overs, mergers, fusions, and restructuring
aiming to restore profitability. Significance of the mass of surplus value.
Most Marxist discussions focus on the "rate" of surplus value, but for
businessmen, the growth of the "mass" of surplus-value, or the gross profit
"volume" produced (denoted here as "P") is just as important, or even more
important. After all, according to US Internal Revenue Service statistics, the
money paid out to corporate officers is equal to about one-third of that paid
out to ordinary employees. The growth of "P" depends on the growth of the
volume of output in an accounting period, and the volume of sales turnover. We
can illustrate the point with a simplified example. If: We see here that within
two years at least, an 18.5% increase in annual profit "volume" has occurred,
even though the rate of profit "decreased" by 0.2%. In other words, there's
nearly "one-fifth more income" to disperse among the owners of the capital,
although the rate of profit return slightly fell . What this simplistic example
really implies is that, provided market sales keep growing and business
expands, a slight fall in the profit rate on capital may not be a point of
concern. After all, capital assets have grown, but more importantly, the total
volume of "revenue" that can be distributed has grown. However, if the total
profit volume created in a capitalist economy stops growing, this becomes a
real problem (as highlighted by Henryk Grossman). Because in that case,
profitability must fall across the board, and business income is reduced
everywhere. In some Marxist crisis theories (e.g. by Henryk Grossmann, Louis C.
Fraina and Paul Mattick), the root "cause" of economic crisis is precisely that
the growth of profit "volume" is eclipsed by the decline of the profit "rate"
in production, the result being that the total profit volume that can be
distributed stagnates or falls. The overall implication is that "market
expansion" is critical for the total "volume" of surplus-value that can be
distributed as profit. Total business income can increase, even although the
profit rate on capital invested falls, if markets keep growing. The logical
outcome of that is globalisation, i.e. the systematic removal of all barriers
to trade worldwide to facilitate market expansion. Relation to taxation. In
general, business leaders and investors are hostile to any attempts to encroach
on total profit volume, especially those of government taxation. The lower
taxes are, other things being equal, the bigger the mass of profit that can be
distributed as income to private investors. It was "tax revolts" that
originally were a powerful stimulus motivating the bourgeoisie to wrest state
power from the feudal aristocracy at the beginning of the capitalist era. In
reality, of course, a substantial portion of tax money is also "redistributed"
to private enterprise in the form of government contracts and subsidies.
Capitalists may therefore be in conflict among themselves about taxes, since
what is a cost to some, is a source of profit to others. Marx never analysed
all this in detail; but the concept of surplus value will apply mainly to taxes
on gross income (personal and business income from production) and on the trade
in products & services. Estate duty for example rarely contains a surplus value
component, although profit could be earned in the transfer of the estate.
Generally, Marx seems to have regarded taxation imposts as a "form" which
disguised real product "values". Apparently following this view, Ernest Mandel
in his 1960 treatise "Marxist Economic Theory" refers to (indirect) taxes as
"arbitrary additions to commodity prices". But this is something of a misnomer,
and disregards that taxes become part of the normal cost-structure of
production. In his later treatise on late capitalism, Mandel astonishingly
hardly mentions the significance of taxation at all, a very serious omission
from the point of view of the real world of modern capitalism since taxes can
reach a magnitude of a third, or even half of GDP (see E. Mandel, "Late
Capitalism". London: Verso, 1975) Relation to the circuits of capital.
Generally, Marx focused in Das Kapital on the new surplus-value generated by
production, and the distribution of this surplus value. In this way, he aimed
to reveal the "origin of the wealth of nations" given a capitalist mode of
production. However, in any real economy, a distinction must be drawn between
the primary circuit of capital, and the secondary circuits. To some extent,
national accounts also do this. The primary circuit refers to the incomes and
products generated and distributed from productive activity (reflected by GDP).
The secondary circuits refer to trade, transfers and transactions occurring
"outside" that sphere, which can also generate incomes, and these incomes may
also involve the realisation of a surplus-value or profit. It is true that Marx
argues no net additions to value can be created through acts of exchange,
economic value being an attribute of labour-products (previous or newly
created) only. Nevertheless trading activity outside the sphere of production
can obviously also yield a surplus-value which represents a "transfer" of value
from one person, country or institution to another. A very simple example would
be if somebody sold a second-hand asset at a profit. This transaction is not
recorded in gross product measures (after all, it isn't new production),
nevertheless a surplus-value is obtained from it. Another example would be
capital gains from property sales. Marx occasionally refers to this kind of
profit as "profit upon alienation", alienation being used here in the
juridical, not sociological sense. By implication, if we just focused on
surplus-value newly created in production, we would "underestimate" total
surplus-values "realised as income" in a country. This becomes obvious if we
compare census estimates of income & expenditure with GDP data. This is another
reason why surplus-value "produced" and surplus-value "realised" are two
different things, although this point is largely ignored in the economics
literature. But it becomes highly important when the real growth of production
stagnates, and a growing portion of capital shifts out of the sphere of
production in search of surplus-value from other deals. Nowadays the volume of
world trade grows significantly faster than GDP, suggesting to Marxian
economists such as Samir Amin that surplus-value realised from commercial trade
(representing to a large extent a transfer of value by intermediaries between
producers and consumers) grows faster than surplus-value realised directly from
production. Thus, if we took the final price of a good (the cost to the final
consumer) and analysed the cost structure of that good, we might find that,
over a period of time, the direct producers get less income and intermediaries
between producers and consumers (traders) get more income from it. That is,
control over the "access" to a good, asset or resource as such may increasingly
become a very important factor in realising a surplus-value. In the worst case,
this amounts to parasitism or extortion. This analysis illustrates a key
feature of surplus value which is that it accumulated by the owners of capital
only within "inefficient" markets because only inefficient markets - i.e. those
in which transparency and competition are low - have profit margins large
enough to facilitate capital accumulation. Ironically, profitable - meaning
inefficient - markets have difficulty meeting the definition a free market
because a free market is to some extent defined as an efficient one: one in
which goods or services are exchanged without coercion or fraud, or in other
words with competition (to prevent monopolistic coercion) and transparency (to
prevent fraud). Measurement. The first attempt to measure the rate of surplus-
value in money-units was by Marx himself in chapter 9 of Das Kapital, using
factory data of a spinning mill supplied by Friedrich Engels (though Marx
credits "a Manchester spinner"). Both in published and unpublished manuscripts,
Marx examines variables affecting the rate and mass of surplus-value in detail.
Some Marxian economists argue that Marx thought the possibility of measuring
surplus value depends on the publicly available data. We can develop
statistical "indicators" of trends, without mistakenly conflating data with the
real thing they represent, or postulating "perfect measurements or perfect
data" in the empiricist manner. Since early studies by Marxian economists like
Eugen Varga, Charles Bettelheim, Joseph Gillmann, Edward Wolff and Shane Mage,
there have been numerous attempts by Marxian economists to measure the trend in
surplus-value statistically using national accounts data. The most convincing
modern attempt is probably that of Professors Anwar Shaikh & Ahmet Tonak [http:
//www.cambridge.org/us/catalogue/catalogue.asp?isbn=0521564794]. Usually this
type of research involves reworking the components of the official measures of
gross output and capital outlays to approximate Marxian categories, in order to
estimate empirically the trends in the ratios thought important in the Marxian
explanation of capital accumulation and economic growth: the rate of surplus-
value, the organic composition of capital, the rate of profit, the rate of
increase in the capital stock, and the rate of reinvestment of realised
surplus-value in production. The Marxian mathematicians Emmanuel Farjoun and
MoshÃ© Machover argue that "even if the rate of surplus value has changed by
10-20% over a hundred years, the real problem explain is why it has changed so
little" (quoted from "The Laws of Chaos; A Probabilistic Approach to Political
Economy" (1983), p.Â 192). The answer to that question must, in part, be sought
in artifacts (statistical distortion effects) of data collection procedures.
Mathematical extrapolations are ultimately based on the data available, but
that data itself may be fragmentary and not the "complete picture". Different
conceptions. In neo-Marxist thought, Paul A. Baran for example substitutes the
concept of "economic surplus" for Marx's surplus value. In a joint work, Paul
Baran and Paul Sweezy define the economic surplus as "the difference between
what a society produces and the costs of producing it" ("Monopoly Capitalism",
New York 1966, p.Â 9). Much depends here on how the costs are valued, and which
costs are taken into account. Piero Sraffa also refers to a "physical surplus"
with a similar meaning, calculated according to the relationship between prices
of physical inputs and outputs. In these theories, surplus product and surplus
value are equated, while value and price are identical, but the "distribution"
of the surplus tends to be separated theoretically from its "production";
whereas Marx insists that the distribution of wealth is governed by the social
conditions in which it is "produced", especially by property relations giving
entitlement to products, incomes and assets (see also relations of production).
In Capital Vol. 3, Marx insists strongly that This is a substantive - if
abstract - thesis about the basic social relations involved in giving and
getting, taking and receiving in human society, and their consequences for the
way work and wealth is shared out. It suggests a "starting point" for an
inquiry into the problem of social order and social change. But obviously it is
"only" a starting point, not the whole story, which would include all the
"variations and gradations". Morality and power of surplus value. A typical
textbook-type example of an alternative interpretation to Marx's is provided by
Lester Thurow. He argues in an "Concise Encyclopedia of Economics" article
[http://www.econlib.org/library/Enc/Profits.html]: "In a capitalistic society,
profits - and losses - hold center stage." But what, he asks, explains profits?
There are "five" reasons for profit, according to Thurow: The problem here is
that Thurow doesn't really provide an objective explanation of profits so much
as a moral for profits, i.e. as a legitimate entitlement or claim, in return
for the supply of capital. He adds that "Attempts have been made to organize
productive societies without the profit motive (...) since the industrial
revolution... there have been essentially no successful economies that have not
taken advantage of the profit motive." The problem here is again a moral
judgement, dependent on what you mean by success. Some societies using the
profit motive were ruined; profit is no guarantee of success, although you can
say that it has powerfully stimulated economic growth. Thurow goes on to note
that "When it comes to actually measuring profits, some difficult accounting
issues arise." Why? Because after deduction of costs from gross income, "It is
hard to say exactly how much must be reinvested to maintain the size of the
capital stock". Ultimately, Thurow implies, the tax department is the arbiter
of the profit volume, because it determines depreciation allowances and other
costs which capitalists may annually deduct in calculating taxable gross
income. This is obviously a theory very different from Marx's. In Thurow's
theory, the aim of business is to "maintain" the capital stock. In Marx's
theory, competition, desire and market fluctuations create the striving and
pressure to "increase" the capital stock; the whole aim of capitalist
production is capital accumulation, i.e. business growth maximising net income.
Marx argues there is no evidence that the "profit" accruing to capitalist
owners is "quantitatively connected" to the "productive contribution" of the
capital they own. In practice, within the capitalist firm, no standard
procedure exists for measuring such a "productive contribution" and for
distributing the residual income accordingly. In Thurow's theory, profit is
mainly just "something that happens" when costs are deducted from sales, or
else a "justly deserved" income. For Marx, increasing profits is, at least in
the longer term, the "bottom line" of business behaviour: the quest for
obtaining extra surplus-value, and the incomes obtained from it, are what
guides capitalist development (in modern language, "creating maximum
shareholder value"). That quest, Marx notes, always involves a power
relationship between different social classes and nations, inasmuch as attempts
are made to force "other" people to pay for costs as much as possible, while
maximising one's own entitlement or claims to "income" from economic activity.
The clash of economic interests that invariably results, implies that the
battle for surplus value will always involve an irreducible moral dimension;
the whole process rests on complex system of negotiations, dealing and
bargaining in which reasons for claims to wealth are asserted, usually within a
legal framework and sometimes through wars. Underneath it all, Marx argues, was
an exploitative relationship. That was the main reason why, Marx argues, the
real sources of surplus-value were shrouded or obscured by ideology, and why
Marx thought that political economy merited a critique. Quite simply, economics
proved unable to theorise capitalism as a "social system", at least not without
moral biases intruding in the very "definition" of its conceptual distinctions.
Hence, even the most simple economic concepts were often riddled with
contradictions. But market trade could function fine, even if the "theory" of
markets was false; all that was required was an agreed and legally enforceable
accounting system. On this point, Marx probably would have agreed with Austrian
school economics -no knowledge of "markets in general" is required to
participate in markets.
