Surveillance state The surveillance state is a government's surveillance of
large numbers of citizens and visitors. Such widespread surveillance is most
usually justified as being necessary to prevent crime or terrorism. The growth
of state surveillance has led to concerns about the erosion of privacy and
civil liberties, and also to worries that over-reliance on such measures may
lead to complacency by law enforcement officers. Examples of fully realised
surveillance states are the Soviet Union, and the former East Germany, which
had a large network of informers and an advanced technology base in computing &
spy-camera technology. (Castells, M. , 2000) But they did not have today's
technologies for mass surveillance, such as the use of databases and pattern
recognition software to cross-correlate information obtained by wire tapping,
including speech recognition and telecommunications traffic analysis,
monitoring of financial transactions, automatic number plate recognition, the
tracking of the position of mobile telephones, and facial recognition systems
and the like which recognise people by their appearance, gait, etc. More
recently, the United Kingdom is seen as a pioneer of mass surveillance. At the
end of 2006 it was described by the Surveillance Studies Network as being 'the
most surveilled country' among the industrialized Western states. The ability
to gather information about citizens is increased by mandating new checks on
paper-based records, such as increased checking of employees' qualifications
and CV's, and by the introduction of digitised biometric data in identity
documents and their corresponding databases, and the cross-correlation of this
data with DNA testing databases. Some technological developments work in favour
of the citizen rather than the state, especially communications software that
uses strong encryption. Many advanced nation-states have implemented laws that
partially protect citizens from unwarranted intrusion - such as the Data
Protection Act 1998 in the United Kingdom, and laws that require a formal
warrant before invading someone's privacy.
