Sustainable development Sustainable development (SD) refers to a mode of human
development in which resource use aims to meet human needs while preserving the
environment so that these needs can be met not only in the present, but also
for generations to come. The term 'sustainable development' was used by the
Brundtland Commission which coined what has become the most often-quoted
definition of sustainable development: "development that meets the needs of the
present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their
own needs.". Sustainable development ties together concern for the carrying
capacity of natural systems with the social challenges faced by humanity. As
early as the 1970s, "sustainability" was employed to describe an economy "in
equilibrium with basic ecological support systems." Ecologists have pointed to
"The Limits to Growth", and presented the alternative of a "steady state
economy" in order to address environmental concerns. The concept of sustainable
development has in the past most often been broken out into three constituent
parts: environmental sustainability, economic sustainability and sociopolitical
sustainability. More recently, it has been suggested that a more consistent
analytical breakdown is to distinguish four domains of economic, ecological,
political and cultural sustainability. This is consistent with the UCLG move to
make 'culture' the fourth domain of sustainability. (See below under the
subheading 'Culture'.) Definition. In 1987, the United Nations released the
Brundtland Report, which included what is now one of the most widely recognised
definitions: "Sustainable development is development that meets the needs of
the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet
their own needs." The United Nations 2005 World Summit Outcome Document refers
to the "interdependent and mutually reinforcing pillars" of sustainable
development as economic development, social development, and environmental
protection. Based on the triple bottom line, numerous sustainability standards
and certification systems have been established in recent years, in particular
in the food industry. Well-known standards include organic, Rainforest
Alliance, fair trade, UTZ Certified, Bird Friendly, and The Common Code for the
Coffee Community. Indigenous peoples have argued, through various international
forums such as the United Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues and the
Convention on Biological Diversity, that there are "four" pillars of
sustainable development, the fourth being cultural. "The Universal Declaration
on Cultural Diversity" (UNESCO, 2001) further elaborates the concept by stating
that "...¬ cultural diversity is as necessary for humankind as biodiversity is
for nature‚Äù; it becomes ‚Äúone of the roots of development understood not
simply in terms of economic growth, but also as a means to achieve a more
satisfactory intellectual, emotional, moral and spiritual existence". In this
vision, cultural diversity is the fourth policy area of sustainable
development. A useful articulation of the values and principles of
sustainability can be found in the Earth Charter. It offers an integrated
vision and definition of strong sustainability. The document, an ethical
framework for a sustainable world, was developed over several years after the
Rio Earth Summit in 1992 and launched officially in 2000. The Charter derives
its legitimacy from the participatory process in which it was drafted, which
included contributions from hundreds of organizations and thousands of
individuals, and from its use since 2000 by thousands of organizations and
individuals that have been using the Earth Charter as an educational instrument
and a policy tool. Economic Sustainability: Agenda 21 clearly identified
information, integration, and participation as key building blocks to help
countries achieve development that recognises these interdependent pillars. It
emphasises that in sustainable development everyone is a user and provider of
information. It stresses the need to change from old sector-centered ways of
doing business to new approaches that involve cross-sectoral co-ordination and
the integration of environmental and social concerns into all development
processes. Furthermore, Agenda 21 emphasises that broad public participation in
decision making is a fundamental prerequisite for achieving sustainable
development. According to Hasna Vancock, sustainability is a process which
tells of a development of all aspects of human life affecting sustenance. It
means resolving the conflict between the various competing goals, and involves
the simultaneous pursuit of economic prosperity, environmental quality and
social equity famously known as three dimensions (triple bottom line) with the
resultant vector being technology, hence it is a continually evolving process;
the 'journey' (the process of achieving sustainability) is of course vitally
important, but only as a means of getting to the destination (the desired
future state). However, the 'destination' of sustainability is not a fixed
place in the normal sense that we understand destination. Instead, it is a set
of wishful characteristics of a future system. The concept has included notions
of weak sustainability, strong sustainability, deep ecology, and just
sustainability. "Just sustainability" offers a socially just conception of
sustainability. Just sustainability effectively addresses what has been called
the 'equity deficit' of "environmental" sustainability (Agyeman, 2005:44). It
is ‚Äúthe egalitarian conception of sustainable development" (Jacobs, 1999:32).
It generates a more nuanced definition of sustainable development: ‚Äúthe need
to ensure a better quality of life for all, now and into the future, in a just
and equitable manner, whilst living within the limits of supporting
ecosystems‚Äù (Agyeman, et al., 2003:5). This conception of sustainable
development focuses equally on four conditions: improving our quality of life
and well-being; on meeting the needs of both present and future generations
("intra"- and "inter"generational equity); on justice and equity in terms of
recognition (Schlosberg, 1999), process, procedure and outcome and on the need
for us to live within ecosystem limits (also called "one planet living")
(Agyeman, 2005:92). Open-source appropriate technology has been proposed as an
approach for reaching just sustainable development. Green development is
generally differentiated from sustainable development in that Green development
prioritizes what its proponents consider to be environmental sustainability
over economic and cultural considerations. Proponents of Sustainable
Development argue that it provides a context in which to improve overall
sustainability where cutting edge Green Development is unattainable. For
example, a cutting edge treatment plant with extremely high maintenance costs
may not be sustainable in regions of the world with fewer financial resources.
An environmentally ideal plant that is shut down due to bankruptcy is obviously
less sustainable than one that is maintainable by the community, even if it is
somewhat less effective from an environmental standpoint. However, this view
depends on whether one determines that it is the development (the plant) which
needs to be sustainable, or whether it is the human-nature ecology (the
environmental conditions) in which the plant exists which should be
sustainable. It follows, then, that an operational but heavily polluting plant
may be judged as actually 'less sustainable' than having no plant at all.
Sustainability educator Michael Thomas Needham referred to 'Sustainable
Development' "as the ability to meet the needs of the present while
contributing to the future generations‚Äô needs." There is an additional focus
on the present generations' responsibility to improve the future generations'
life by restoring the previous ecosystem damage and resisting to contribute to
further ecosystem damage. Domains. Economics. domain of 'economics' is
fundamental to considerations of sustainable development, however there has
been considerable criticism of the tendency to use the three-domain model of
the triple bottom line: economics, environment and social. This approach is
challenged to the extent that it treats the economy as the master domain, or as
a domain that exists outside of the social; it treats the environment as a
world of natural metrics; and it treats the social as a miscellaneous
collection of extra things that do not fit into the economic or environmental
domains (see the section on Economic sustainability below). In the alternative
Circles of sustainability approach, the economic domain is defined as the
practices and meanings associated with the production, use, and management of
resources, where the concept of ‚Äòresources‚Äô is used in the broadest sense
of that word. Ecology. The domain of 'ecology' has been difficult to resolve
because it too has a social dimension. Some research activities start from the
definition of green development to argue that the environment is a combination
of nature and culture. However, this has the effect of making the domain model
unwieldy if culture is to be considered a domain in its own right (see below).
Others write of ecology as being more broadly at the intersection of the social
and the environmental - hence, ecology. This move allows culture to be used as
a domain alongside economics and ecology. Culture. Working with a different
emphasis, some researchers and institutions have pointed out that a fourth
dimension should be added to the dimensions of sustainable development, since
the triple-bottom-line dimensions of economic, environmental and social do not
seem to be enough to reflect the complexity of contemporary society. In this
context, the Agenda 21 for culture and the United Cities and Local Governments
(UCLG) Executive Bureau lead the preparation of the policy statement
‚ÄúCulture: Fourth Pillar of Sustainable Development‚Äù, passed on 17 November
2010, in the framework of the World Summit of Local and Regional Leaders ‚Äì
3rd World Congress of UCLG, held in Mexico City. This document inaugurates a
new perspective and points to the relation between culture and sustainable
development through a dual approach: developing a solid cultural policy and
advocating a cultural dimension in all public policies. The Network of
Excellence "Sustainable Development in a Diverse World", sponsored by the
European Union, integrates multidisciplinary capacities and interprets cultural
diversity as a key element of a new strategy for sustainable development. The
Circles of Sustainability approach defines the cultural domain as practices,
discourses, and material expressions, which, over time, express continuities
and discontinuities of social meaning. Politics. The United Nations Global
Compact Cities Programme has defined sustainable political development is a way
that broadens the usual definition beyond states and governance. The political
is defined as the domain of practices and meanings associated with basic issues
of social power as they pertain to the organisation, authorisation,
legitimation and regulation of a social life held in common. This definition is
in accord with the view that political change is important for responding to
economic, ecological and cultural challenges. It also means that the politics
of economic change can be addressed. This is particularly true in relation to
the controversial concept of 'sustainable enterprise' that frames global needs
and risks as 'opportunities' for private enterprise to provide profitable
entrepreneurial solutions. This concept is now being taught at many business
schools including the Center for Sustainable Global Enterprise at Cornell
University and the Erb Institute for Global Sustainable Enterprise at the
University of Michigan. Sustainable development is an eclectic concept and a
wide array of political views fall under its umbrella. The concept has included
notions of weak sustainability, strong sustainability and deep ecology.
Different conceptions also reveal a strong tension between ecocentrism and
anthropocentrism. Many definitions and images (Visualizing Sustainability) of
sustainable development coexist. Broadly defined, the sustainable development
mantra enjoins current generations to take a systems approach to growth and
development and to manage natural, produced, and social capital for the welfare
of their own and future generations. During the last ten years, different
organizations have tried to measure and monitor the proximity to what they
consider sustainability by implementing what has been called sustainability
metrics and indices.This has engendered considerable political debate about
what is being measured. Sustainable development is said to set limits on the
developing world. While current first world countries polluted significantly
during their development, the same countries encourage third world countries to
reduce pollution, which sometimes impedes growth. Some consider that the
implementation of sustainable development would mean a reversion to pre-modern
lifestyles. History of the concept. The concept of sustainable development was
originally synonymous with that of sustainability and is often still used in
that way. Both terms derive from the older forestry term "sustained yield",
which in turn is a translation of the German term "nachhaltiger Ertrag" dating
from 1713. According to different sources, the concept of sustainability in the
sense of a balance between resource consumption and reproduction was however
applied to forestry already in the 12th to 16th century. ‚ÄòSustainability‚Äô
is a semantic modification, extension and transfer of the term ‚Äòsustained
yield‚Äô. This had been the doctrine and, indeed, the ‚Äòholy grail‚Äô of
foresters all over the world for more or less two centuries. The essence of
‚Äòsustained yield forestry‚Äô was described for example by William A. Duerr, a
leading American expert on forestry: ‚ÄúTo fulfill our obligations to our
descendents and to stabilize our communities, each generation should sustain
its resources at a high level and hand them along undiminished. The sustained
yield of timber is an aspect of man‚Äôs most fundamental need: to sustain life
itself.‚Äù A fine anticipation of the Brundtland-formula. Not just the concept
of sustainable development, but also its current interpretations have its roots
in forest management. "Strong" sustainability stipulates living solely off the
interest of natural capital, whereas adherents of "weak" sustainability are
content to keep constant the sum of natural and human capital. The history of
the concept of sustainability is however much older. Already in 400 BCE,
Aristotle referred to a similar Greek concept in talking about household
economics. This Greek household concept differed from modern ones in that the
household had to be self-sustaining at least to a certain extent and could not
just be consumption oriented. The first use of the term "sustainable" in the
modern sense was by the Club of Rome in March 1972 in its epoch-making report
on the ‚ÄòLimits to Growth", written by a group of scientists led by Dennis and
Donella Meadows of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Describing the
desirable "state of global equilibrium", the authors used the word
"sustainable": ""We are searching for a model output that represents a world
system that is: 1. sustainable without sudden and uncontrolled collapse; and 2.
capable of satisfying the basic material requirements of all of its people"."
Environmental sustainability. Environmental sustainability is the process of
making sure current processes of interaction with the environment are pursued
with the idea of keeping the environment as pristine as naturally possible
based on ideal-seeking behavior. Thus, environmental sustainability demands
that society designs activities to meet human needs while indefinitely
preserving the life support systems of the planet. This, for example, entails
using water sustainably, only utilizing renewable energy, and sustainable
material supplies (e.g. harvesting wood from forests at a rate that maintains
the biomass and biodiversity). An "unsustainable situation" occurs when natural
capital (the sum total of nature's resources) is used up faster than it can be
replenished. Sustainability requires that human activity only uses nature's
resources at a rate at which they can be replenished naturally. Inherently the
concept of sustainable development is intertwined with the concept of carrying
capacity. Theoretically, the long-term result of environmental degradation is
the inability to sustain human life. Such degradation on a global scale could
imply extinction for humanity. Economic sustainability. The Venn diagram of
sustainable development has many versions, but was first used by economist
Edward Barbier (1987). However, Pearce, Barbier and Markandya (1989) criticized
the Venn approach due to the intractability of operationalizing separate
indices of economic, environmental, and social sustainability and somehow
combining them. They also noted that the Venn approach was inconsistent with
the Brundtland Commission Report, which emphasized the interlinkages between
economic development, environmental degradation, and population pressure
instead of three objectives. Economists have since focused on viewing the
economy and the environment as a single interlinked system with a unified
valuation methodology (Hamilton 1999, Dasgupta 2007). Intergenerational equity
can be incorporated into this approach, as has become common in economic
valuations of climate change economics (Heal 2009). Ruling out discrimination
against future generations and allowing for the possibility of renewable
alternatives to petro-chemicals and other non-renewable resources, efficient
policies are compatible with increasing human welfare, eventually reaching a
golden-rule steady state (Ayong le Kama 2001 and Endress "et al." 2005). Thus
the three pillars of sustainable development are interlinkages,
intergenerational equity, and dynamic efficiency (Stavins et al. 2003). Arrow
et al. (2004) and other economists (e.g. Asheim,1999 and Pezzey, 1989 and 1997)
have advocated a form of the weak criterion for sustainable development ‚Äì the
requirement than the wealth of a society, including human capital, knowledge
capital and natural capital (as well as produced capital) not decline over
time. Others, including Barbier 2007, continue to contend that strong
sustainability ‚Äì non-depletion of essential forms of natural capital ‚Äì may
be appropriate. Types of capital. The sustainable development debate is based
on the assumption that societies need to manage three types of capital
(economic, social, and natural), which may be non-substitutable and whose
consumption might be irreversible. Daly (1991), for example, points to the fact
that natural capital can not necessarily be substituted by economic capital.
While it is possible that we can find ways to replace some natural resources,
it is much more unlikely that they will ever be able to replace eco-system
services, such as the protection provided by the ozone layer, or the climate
stabilizing function of the Amazonian forest. In fact natural capital, social
capital and economic capital are often complementarities. A further obstacle to
substitutability lies also in the multi-functionality of many natural
resources. Forests, for example, not only provide the raw material for paper
(which can be substituted quite easily), but they also maintain biodiversity,
regulate water flow, and absorb CO2. Another problem of natural and social
capital deterioration lies in their partial irreversibility. The loss in
biodiversity, for example, is often definite. The same can be true for cultural
diversity. For example with globalisation advancing quickly the number of
indigenous languages is dropping at alarming rates. Moreover, the depletion of
natural and social capital may have non-linear consequences. Consumption of
natural and social capital may have no observable impact until a certain
threshold is reached. A lake can, for example, absorb nutrients for a long time
while actually increasing its productivity. However, once a certain level of
algae is reached lack of oxygen causes the lake‚Äôs ecosystem to break down
suddenly. Market failure. If the degradation of natural and social capital has
such important consequence the question arises why action is not taken more
systematically to alleviate it. Cohen and Winn (2007) point to four types of
market failure as possible explanations: First, while the benefits of natural
or social capital depletion can usually be privatized the costs are often
externalized (i.e. they are borne not by the party responsible but by society
in general). Second, natural capital is often undervalued by society since we
are not fully aware of the real cost of the depletion of natural capital.
Information asymmetry is a third reason‚Äîoften the link between cause and
effect is obscured, making it difficult for actors to make informed choices.
Cohen and Winn close with the realization that contrary to economic theory many
firms are not perfect optimizers. They postulate that firms often do not
optimize resource allocation because they are caught in a "business as usual"
mentality. Business case. "Eco-efficiency is achieved by the delivery of
competitively priced goods and services that satisfy human needs and bring
quality of life, while progressively reducing ecological impacts and resource
intensity throughout the life-cycle to a level at least in line with the
earth‚Äôs carrying capacity." (DeSimone and Popoff, 1997: 47) Similar to the
eco-efficiency concept but so far less explored is the second criterion for
corporate sustainability. Socio-efficiency describes the relation between a
firm's value added and its social impact. Whereas, it can be assumed that most
corporate impacts on the environment are negative (apart from rare exceptions
such as the planting of trees) this is not true for social impacts. These can
be either positive (e.g. corporate giving, creation of employment) or negative
(e.g. work accidents, mobbing of employees, human rights abuses). Depending on
the type of impact socio-efficiency thus either tries to minimize negative
social impacts (i.e. accidents per value added) or maximise positive social
impacts (i.e. donations per value added) in relation to the value added. Both
eco-efficiency and socio-efficiency are concerned primarily with increasing
economic sustainability. In this process they instrumentalize both natural and
social capital aiming to benefit from win-win situations. However, as Dyllick
and Hockerts point out the business case alone will not be sufficient to
realise sustainable development. They point towards eco-effectiveness, socio-
effectiveness, sufficiency, and eco-equity as four criteria that need to be met
if sustainable development is to be reached. Sustainable agriculture.
Sustainable agriculture may be defined as consisting of environmentally
friendly methods of farming that allow the production of crops or livestock
without damage to human or natural systems. More specifically, it might be said
to include preventing adverse effects to soil, water, biodiversity, surrounding
or downstream resources -- as well as to those working or living on the farm or
in neighboring areas. Furthermore, the concept of sustainable agriculture
extends intergenerationally, relating to passing on a conserved or improved
natural resource, biotic, and economic base instead of one which has been
depleted or polluted. Elements. According to the World Agroforestry Centre,
agroforestry is a collective name for land use systems and practices in which
woody perennials are deliberately integrated with crops and/or animals on the
same land management unit. The integration can be either in a spatial mixture
or in a temporal sequence. There are normally both ecological and economic
interactions between woody and non-woody components in agroforestry. Many
farmers in tropical & temperate countries survive by managing a mix of
different crops or animals. The best known form of mixing occurs probably where
crop residues are used to feed the animals and the excreta from animals are
used as nutrients for the crop. Other forms of mixing takes place where grazing
under fruit trees keeps the grass short or where manure from pigs is used to
feed the fish. Mixed farming exists in many forms depending on external and
internal factors. External factors are: Weather Patterns, Market Prices,
Political Stability and Technological Development. Internal factors relate to
Local Soil Characteristics, Composition of family and Farmer‚Äôs Ingenuity.
Mixed Farming provides farmers with a) an opportunity to diversify risk from
single-crop production; (b) to use labour more efficiently; (c) to have a
source of cash for purchasing farm inputs; (d) to add value to crop or crop by-
product; (e) combining crops and livestocks. The process of growing two or more
crops in the same piece of land, during the same season is called Multiple
Cropping. It can be rightly called a form of polyculture. It can be ‚Äì (a)
Double Cropping (the practice where the second crop is planted after the first
has been harvested); (b) Relay Cropping (the practice where a second crop is
started along with the first one, before it is harvested). The process of
growing two or more dissimilar or unrelated crops in the same piece of land in
different seasons is known as Crop Rotation. This process could be adopted as
it comes with a series of benefits like ‚Äì (a) avoid the build up of pests
that often occurs when one species is continuously cropped; (b) the traditional
element of crop rotation is the replenishment of nitrogen through the use of
green manure in sequence with cereals and other crops; (c) Crop rotation can
also improve soil structure and fertility by alternating deep-rooted and
shallow-rooted plants; (d) it is a component of polyculture. Criticisms. The
concept of "Sustainable Development" raises several critiques at different
levels. Consequences. John Baden views the notion of sustainable development as
dangerous because the consequences have unknown effects. He writes: "In economy
like in ecology, the interdependence rule applies. Isolated actions are
impossible. A policy which is not carefully enough thought will carry along
various perverse and adverse effects for the ecology as much as for the
economy. Many suggestions to save our environment and to promote a model of
'sustainable development' risk indeed leading to reverse effects." Moreover, he
evokes the bounds of public action which are underlined by the public choice
theory: the quest by politicians of their own interests, lobby pressure,
partial disclosure etc. He develops his critique by noting the vagueness of the
expression, which can cover anything It is a gateway to interventionist
proceedings which can be against the principle of freedom and without proven
efficacy. Against this notion, he is a proponent of private property to impel
the producers and the consumers to save the natural resources. According to
Baden, ‚Äúthe improvement of environment quality depends on the market economy
and the existence of legitimate and protected property rights.‚Äù They enable
the effective practice of personal responsibility and the development of
mechanisms to protect the environment. The State can in this context ‚Äúcreate
conditions which encourage the people to save the environment.‚Äù Vagueness of
the term. Some criticize the term "sustainable development", stating that the
term is too vague. For example, both Jean-Marc Jancovici and the philosopher
Luc Ferry express this view. The latter writes about sustainable development:
"I know that this term is obligatory, but I find it also absurd, or rather so
vague that it says nothing." Luc Ferry adds that the term is trivial by a proof
of contradiction: "who would like to be a proponent of an ‚Äúuntenable
development! Of course no one! [..] The term is more charming than meaningful.
[..] Everything must be done so that it does not turn into Russian-type
administrative planning with ill effects." sustainable development has become
obscured by conflicting world views, the expansionist and the ecological, and
risks being co-opted by individuals and institutions that perpetuate many
aspects of the expansionist model. Basis. Sylvie Brunel, French geographer and
specialist of the Third World, develops in "A qui profite le d√©veloppement
durable" (Who benefits from sustainable development?) (2008) a critique of the
basis of sustainable development, with its binary vision of the world, can be
compared to the Christian vision of Good and Evil, an idealized nature where
the human being is an animal like the others or even an alien. Nature ‚Äì as
Rousseau thought ‚Äì is better than the human being. It is a parasite, harmful
for the nature. But the human is the one who protects the biodiversity, where
normally only the strong survive. Moreover, she thinks that the core ideas of
sustainable development are a hidden form of protectionism by developed
countries impeding the development of the other countries.[how?] For Sylvie
Brunel, sustainable development serves as a pretext for protectionism and "I
have the feeling that sustainable development is perfectly helping out
capitalism". "De-growth". The proponents of the de-growth reckon that the term
of sustainable development is an oxymoron. According to them, on a planet where
20% of the population consumes 80% of the natural resources, a sustainable
development cannot be possible for this 20%: "According to the origin of the
concept of sustainable development, a development which meets the needs of the
present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their
own needs, the right term for the developed countries should be a sustainable
de-growth". For several decades, theorists of steady state economy and
ecological economy have been positing that reduction in population growth or
even negative population growth is required for the human community not to
destroy its planetary support systems, i.e., to date, increases in efficiency
of production and consumption have not been sufficient, when applied to
existing trends in population and resource depletion and waste by-production,
to allow for projections of future sustainability. Measurability. In 2007 a
report for the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency stated: ‚ÄúWhile much
discussion and effort has gone into sustainability indicators, none of the
resulting systems clearly tells us whether our society is sustainable. At best,
they can tell us that we are heading in the wrong direction, or that our
current activities are not sustainable. More often, they simply draw our
attention to the existence of problems, doing little to tell us the origin of
those problems and nothing to tell us how to solve them.‚Äù Nevertheless a
majority of authors assume that a set of well defined and harmonised indicators
is the only way to make sustainability tangible. Those indicators are expected
to be identified and adjusted through empirical observations (trial and error)
see also Ecological footprint. The most common critiques are related to issues
like data quality, comparability, objective function and the necessary
resources. However a more general criticism is coming from the project
management community: How can a sustainable development be achieved at global
level if we cannot monitor it in any single project? The Cuban-born researcher
and entrepreneur Sonia Bueno suggests an alternative approach that is based
upon the integral, long-term cost-benefit relationship as a measure and
monitoring tool for the sustainability of every project, activity or
enterprise. Furthermore this concept aims to be a practical guideline towards
sustainable development following the principle of conservation and increment
of value rather than restricting the consumption of resources.
