Sweatshop Sweatshop (or sweat factory) is a negatively connoted term for any
working environment considered to be unacceptably difficult or dangerous.
Sweatshop workers often work long hours for very low pay, regardless of laws
mandating overtime pay or a minimum wage. Child labor laws may be violated.
Sweatshops may have hazardous materials and situations. Employees may be
subject to employer abuse without an easy way, if any way, to protect
themselves. History. While many workplaces through history have been crowded,
dangerous, low-paying and without job security, the concept of a sweatshop has
its origins between 1830 and 1850 as a specific type of workshop in which a
certain type of middleman, the "sweater", directed others in "garment making"
(the process of producing clothing), under arduous conditions. The terms
"sweater" for the middleman and "sweating system" for the process of
subcontracting piecework were used in early critiques like Charles Kingsley's
"Cheap Clothes and Nasty", written in 1850, which described conditions in
London, England. The workplaces created for the sweating system were called
"sweatshops" and comprised workplaces ranging from only a few workers to as
many as one-hundred or more. Between 1850 and 1900, sweatshops attracted the
rural poor to rapidly-growing cities, and attracted immigrants to places like
London, England and New York City's garment district, located near the
tenements of New York's Lower East Side. Wherever they were located, sweatshops
also attracted critics and labour leaders who cited them as crowded, poorly
ventilated, and prone to fires and rat infestations, since much of the work was
done by many people crowded into small tenement rooms. In the 1890s a group
calling itself the National Anti-Sweating League was formed in Melbourne,
Australia and campaigned successfully for a minimum wage via trade boards. A
group with the same name campaigned from 1906 in the UK, resulting in the Trade
Boards Act 1909. In 1910, the International Ladies' Garment Workers' Union was
founded in an effort to improve the condition of these workers. Criticism of
garment sweatshops became a major force behind workplace safety regulation and
labor laws. As some journalists strove to change working conditions, the term
"sweatshop" came to describe a broader set of workplaces whose conditions were
considered inferior. In the United States, investigative journalists, known as
Muckrakers, wrote exposés of business practices, and progressive politicians
campaigned for new laws. Notable exposés of sweatshop conditions include Jacob
Riis' photo documentary "How the Other Half Lives" and Upton Sinclair's book,
"The Jungle" about the meat packing industry. In 1911, negative public
perceptions of sweatshops were galvanized by the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory
Fire in New York City. The pivotal role of this time and place is chronicled at
the Lower East Side Tenement Museum, part of the Lower East Side Tenement
National Historic Site. While trade unions, minimum wage laws, fire safety
codes, and labour laws have made sweatshops (in the original sense) rarer in
the developed world, they did not eliminate them, and the term came to be
increasingly associated with factories in the developing world. In a report
issued in 1994, the United States Government Accountability Office found that
there were still thousands of sweatshops in the United States, using a
definition of a "sweatshop" as any "employer that violates more than one
federal or state labour law governing minimum wage and overtime, child labour,
industrial homework, occupational safety and health, workers' compensation, or
industry registration". This recent definition eliminates any historical
distinction about the role of a middleman or the items produced, and focuses on
the legal standards of developed country workplaces. An area of controversy
between supporters of outsourcing production to the Third World and the anti-
sweatshop movement is whether such standards can or should be applied to the
workplaces of the developing world. Sweatshops are also sometimes implicated in
human trafficking when workers have been tricked into starting work without
informed consent, or when workers are kept at work through debt bondage or
mental duress, all of which are more likely in cases where the workforce is
drawn from children or the uneducated rural poor. Because they often exist in
places without effective workplace safety or environmental laws, sweatshops
sometimes injure their workers or the environment at greater rates than would
be acceptable in developed countries. Sometimes penal labor facilities
(employing prisoners) are grouped under the sweatshop label. Sweatshops have
proved a difficult issue to resolve because their roots lie in the conceptual
foundations of the world economy. Developing countries like India, China,
Vietnam, Bangladesh and Honduras encourage the outsourcing of work from the
developed world to factories within their borders in order to provide
employment for their people and profits to their employers. The shift of
production to developing countries is part of the process known as
globalization, but may also be described as neoliberal globalization to
emphasize the role that free market economics plays in outsourcing. Positions
on sweatshops. Anti-sweatshop movement. Some of the earliest sweatshop critics
were found in the 19th century abolitionist movement that had originally
coalesced in opposition to chattel slavery, and many abolitionists saw
similarities between slavery and sweatshop work. As slavery was successively
outlawed in industrial countries between 1794 (in France) and 1865 (in the
United States), some abolitionists sought to broaden the anti-slavery consensus
to include other forms of harsh labor, including sweatshops. As it happened,
the first significant law to address sweatshops (the Factory Act of 1833) was
passed in the United Kingdom at the same time that the slave trade (1807) and
ownership of slaves (1833) were made illegal. Ultimately, the abolitionist
movement split apart. Some advocates focused on working conditions and found
common cause with trade unions and Marxists and socialist political groups, or
progressive movement and the muckrakers. Others focused on the continued slave
trade and involuntary servitude in the colonial world. For those groups that
remained focused on slavery, sweatshops became one of the primary objects of
controversy. Workplaces across multiple sectors of the economy were categorized
as sweatshops. However, there were fundamental philosophical disagreements
about what constituted slavery. Unable to agree on the status of sweatshops,
the abolitionists working with the League of Nations and the United Nations
ultimately backed away from efforts to define slavery, and focused instead on a
common precursor of slavery – human trafficking. Those focused on working
conditions included Friedrich Engels, whose book "The Condition of the Working
Class in England in 1844" would inspire the Marxist movement named for his
collaborator, Karl Marx. In the United Kingdom the Factory Act was revised six
further times between 1844 and 1878 to help improve the condition of workers by
limiting work hours and the use of child labor. The formation of the
International Labour Organization in 1919 under the League of Nations and then
the United Nations sought to address the plight of workers the world over.
Concern over working conditions as described by muckraker journalists during
the Progressive Era in the United States saw the passage of new workers rights
laws and ultimately resulted in the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938, passed
during the New Deal. More recently, the anti-globalization movement has arisen
in opposition to corporate globalization, a process by which multinational
corporations move their operations overseas in order to lower their costs and
increase profits. The anti-sweatshop movement has much in common with the anti-
globalization movement. Both consider sweatshops harmful, and both have accused
many companies (such as the Walt Disney Company, The Gap, and Nike) of using
sweatshops. Some in these movements charge that neoliberal globalization is
similar to the sweating system, arguing that there tends to be a "race to the
bottom", as multinationals leap from one low-wage country to another searching
for lower production costs, in the same way that "sweaters" would have steered
production to the lowest cost sub-contractor. Various groups support or embody
the anti-sweatshop movement today. The National Labor Committee brought
sweatshops into the mainstream media in the 1990s when it exposed the use of
sweatshop and child labor to sew Kathie Lee Gifford's Wal-Mart label. United
Students Against Sweatshops is active on college campuses. The International
Labor Rights Fund filed a lawsuit on behalf of workers in China, Nicaragua,
Swaziland, Indonesia, and Bangladesh against Wal-Mart charging the company with
knowingly developing purchasing policies particularly relating to price and
delivery time that are impossible to meet while following the Wal-Mart code of
conduct. Labor unions, such as the AFL-CIO, have helped support the anti-
sweatshop movement out of concern both for the welfare of workers in the
developing world and those in the United States. Critics point out that
sweatshop workers often do not earn enough money to buy the products that they
make, even though such items are often commonplace goods such as t-shirts,
shoes, and toys. In 2003, Honduran garment factory workers were paid US$0.24
for each $50 Sean John sweatshirt, $0.15 for each long-sleeved t-shirt, and
only five cents for each short-sleeved shirt – less than one-half of one
percent of the retail price. Even comparing international costs of living, the
$0.15 that a Honduran worker earned for the long-sleeved t-shirt was equal in
purchasing power to $0.50 in the United States. Critics of sweatshops cite high
savings, increased capital investment in developing nations, diversification of
their exports and their status as trade ports as the reason for their economic
success rather than sweatshops and cite the numerous cases in the East Asian
"Tiger Economies" where sweatshops have reduced living standards and wages.
They believe that better-paying jobs, increased capital investment and domestic
ownership of resources will improve the economies of sub-Saharan Africa rather
than sweatshops. They point to good labor standards developing strong
manufacturing export sectors in wealthier sub-Saharan countries such as
Mauritius and believe measures like these will improve economic conditions in
developing nations. Critics of sweatshops argue that the minor gains made by
employees of some of these institutions are outweighed by the negative costs
such as lowered wages to increase profit margins and that the institutions pay
less than the daily expenses of their workers. They also point to the fact that
sometimes local jobs offered higher wages before trade liberalization provided
tax incentives to allow sweatshops to replace former local unionized jobs. They
further contend that sweatshop jobs are not necessarily inevitable. Eric
Toussaint claims that quality of life in developing countries was actually
higher between 1945–1980 before the international debt crisis of 1982 harmed
economies in developing countries causing them to turn to IMF and World Bank-
organized "structural adjustments" and that unionized jobs pay more than
sweatshop ones overall – "several studies of workers producing for US firms
in Mexico are instructive: workers at the Aluminum Company of America’s
Ciudad Acuna plant earn between $21.44 and $24.60 per week, but a weekly basket
of basic food items costs $26.87. Mexican GM workers earn enough to buy a pound
of apples in 30 minutes of work, while GM workers in the US earn as much in 5
minutes." People critical of sweatshops believe that "free trade agreements" do
not truly promote free trade at all but instead seek to protect multinational
corporations from competition by local industries (which are sometimes
unionized). They believe free trade should only involve reducing tariffs and
barriers to entry and that multinational businesses should operate within the
laws in the countries they want to do business in rather than seeking immunity
from obeying local environmental and labor laws. They believe these conditions
are what give rise to sweatshops rather than natural industrialization or
economic progression. Critics also point to the fact that sweatshops often do
not pay taxes and thus don't pay for the public services they use for
production and distribution and don't contribute to the country's tax revenue.
In some countries, such as China, it is not uncommon for these institutions to
withhold workers' pay. Furthermore, critics of sweatshops point to the fact
that those in the West who defend sweatshops show double standards by
complaining about sweatshop labor conditions in countries considered enemies or
hostile by Western governments, while still gladly consuming their exports but
complaining about the quality. They contend that multinational jobs should be
expected to operate according to international labor and environmental laws and
minimum wage standards like businesses in the West do. Pro-sweatshop arguments.
In 1997, economist Jeffrey Sachs said, "My concern is not that there are too
many sweatshops, but that there are too few." Sachs and other proponents of
sweatshops cite the economic theory of comparative advantage, which states that
international trade will, in the long run, make all parties better off. The
theory holds that developing countries improve their condition by doing
something that they do "better" than industrialized nations (in this case, they
charge less but do the same work). Developed countries will also be better off
because their workers can shift to jobs that they do better. These are jobs
that some economists say usually entail a level of education and training that
is exceptionally difficult to obtain in the developing world. Thus, economists
like Sachs say, developing countries get factories and jobs that they would not
otherwise. Some would say with this situation occurs when developing countries
try to increase wages because sweatshops tend to just get moved on to a new
state that is more welcoming. This leads to a situation where states often will
not try to get increased wages for sweatshop workers for fear of losing
investment and boosted GDP. However, this only means average wages around the
world will increase at a steady rate. A nation only gets left behind if it
demands wages higher than the current market price for that labor. When asked
about the working condition in sweatshops, proponents say that although wages
and working conditions may appear inferior by the standards of developed
nations, they are actually improvements over what the people in developing
countries had before. It is said that if jobs in such factories did not improve
their workers' standard of living, those workers would not have taken the jobs
when they appeared. It is also often pointed out that, unlike in the
industrialized world, the sweatshops are not replacing high-paying jobs.
Rather, sweatshops offer an improvement over subsistence farming and other
back-breaking tasks, or even prostitution, trash picking, or starvation by
unemployment. The absence of the work opportunities provided by sweatshops can
quickly lead to malnourishment or starvation. After the Child Labor Deterrence
Act was introduced in the US, an estimated 50,000 children were dismissed from
their garment industry jobs in Asia, leaving many to resort to jobs such as
"stone-crushing, street hustling, and prostitution." UNICEF's 1997 "State of
the World's Children" study found these alternative jobs "more hazardous and
exploitative than garment production." In the Wal-Mart episode of , Professor
of Economics Benjamin Powell from San Jose State University is interviewed.
Professor Powell argues that sweatshop-type jobs in a developing country are
often a significant improvement over other employment options (for example,
subsistence farming). He further notes that the United States went through its
own period of sweatshop labor during its development. According to an article
in Gale Opposing Viewpoints in Context, sweatshops became prevalent in the
United States during the Industrial Revolution. As new jobs in factories began
to appear, people left the hard life of farming to work in these factories.
Although the working conditions and wages in these factories were very poor,
the agricultural nature of the economy shifted into a manufacturing one because
of this industrialization. Through this new industrialized economy, sufficient
wealth was created and a large middle class began to emerge. The labor movement
came about with this rise in the average level of income and factory workers
began to demand better wages and working conditions. Through much struggle,
workers and advocates were able to achieve basic rights for workers, which
included the right to form unions, and negotiate terms such as wages, overtime
pay, health insurance, and retirement pensions; and eventually they were also
able to attain legal protections such as minimum wage standards, and
discrimination and sexual abuse protections. Furthermore, Congress set forth to
ensure a minimum set of safety standards were followed in workplaces by passing
the Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSHA) in 1970. These developments were
able to improve working environments for Americans but it was through
sweatshops that the economy grew and people were able to accumulate wealth and
move out of poverty. As Nobel prize-winning economist Paul Krugman states in a
1997 article for Slate, “as manufacturing grows in poor countries, it creates
a ripple effect that benefits ordinary people: ‘The pressure on the land
becomes less intense, so rural wages rise; the pool of unemployed urban
dwellers always anxious for work shrinks, so factories start to compete with
each other for workers, and urban wages also begin to rise.’ In time average
wages creep up to a level comparable to minimum-wage jobs in the United
States.” In an article about a Nike sweatshop in Vietnam, Johan Norberg
wrote, "But when I talk to a young Vietnamese woman, Tsi-Chi, at the factory,
it is not the wages she is most happy about. Sure, she makes five times more
than she did, she earns more than her husband, and she can now afford to build
an extension to her house. But the most important thing, she says, is that she
doesn't have to work outdoors on a farm any more... Farming means 10 to 14
hours a day in the burning sun or the intensive rain... The most persistent
demand Nike hears from the workers is for an expansion of the factories so that
their relatives can be offered a job as well." According to a November 2001 BBC
article, in the previous two months, 100,000 sweatshop workers in Bangladesh
had lost their sweatshop jobs. The sweatshop workers wanted their jobs back,
and the Bangladeshi government was planning to lobby the U.S. government to
repeal its trade barriers so the sweatshop workers could have their jobs back.
A 2005 article in the "Christian Science Monitor" states, "For example, in
Honduras, the site of the infamous Kathy Lee Gifford sweatshop scandal, the
average apparel worker earns $13.10 per day, yet 44 percent of the country's
population lives on less than $2 per day... In Cambodia, Haiti, Nicaragua, and
Honduras, the average wage paid by a firm accused of being a sweatshop is more
than double the average income in that country's economy." On three documented
occasions during the 1990s, anti-sweatshop activists in rich countries have
apparently caused increases in child prostitution in poor countries. In
Bangladesh, there was a closure of several sweatshops which had been run by a
German company, and as a result, thousands of Bangladeshi children who had been
working in those sweatshops ended up working as prostitutes, turning to crime,
or starving to death. In Pakistan, several sweatshops, including ones run by
Nike, Reebok, and other corporations, were closed, which caused those Pakistani
children to turn to prostitution. In Nepal, a carpet manufacturing company
closed several sweatshops, resulting in thousands of Nepalese girls turning to
prostitution. An October 19, 2008 Associated Press article reported about the
Chinese citizens complaining about how the current U.S. economic crises had
caused them to lose their sweatshop jobs. The article quoted Wang Wenming, who
had lost his job at a Dongguan sweatshop, as saying, "This financial crisis in
America is going to kill us. It's already taking food out of our mouths."
Defenders of sweatshops cite Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea, and Taiwan as
recent examples of countries that benefited from having sweatshops.
