Swingometer The swingometer is a graphics device that shows the swing from one
party to another on British election results programmes. It was invented by
Peter Milne, and later refined by David Butler and Robert McKenzie. The first
outing on British television was during a regional output from the BBC studios
in Bristol during the 1955 general election (the first UK general election to
be televised) and was used to show the swing in the two constituencies of
Southampton Itchen and Southampton Test. Following this use in 1955, the BBC
adopted the swingometer on a national basis and it was unveiled in the national
broadcasts for the 1959 general election. This swingometer merely showed the
national swing in Britain but not the implications on that swing on the
composition of parliament. These issues were not addressed until the 1964
general election. The swingometer for that election showed not only the
national swing, but also the implications of that national swing. So for
instance, a 3.5% swing to Labour would see Labour become a majority government
whilst any swing to the Conservatives would see Sir Alec Douglas-Home reelected
as Prime Minister with a huge parliamentary majority. In the end the result was
a Labour overall majority of 4, and so when the 1966 general election came
around, a new element had to be added (namely the prospect of a hung
parliament). At the 1970 general election, the swingometer entered the age of
colour television and showed the traditional party colours of red for Labour
and blue for Conservative and had to be extended due to the success of the
Conservative party at that election. However, following the success of the
Liberals in the by-elections held between the 1970 and February 1974 general
elections, the swingometer was reduced in scale to just a small standby as the
computers used by the BBC were deemed more reliable. As the Liberal Party
reduced in importance the swingometer was brought back for the 1979 general
election but for the 1983 and 1987 general elections computers were introduced
to show changes in support in both map and graphic form. The swingometer was
brought back for the 1992 general election covering the whole side of the
election studio and also had to be manhandled by at least four technicians as
well as Peter Snow who had taken over the election graphics role following the
death of Bob McKenzie. This swingometer was too big for comfort and in 1997
started on a shrinking process and was changed from an actual swingometer to a
virtual reality swingometer. For the 2001 general election the graphic was
reduced further. Following a few experiments in the United Kingdom local
elections in 2003 and 2004 the swingometer for the next election in 2005 was
held on virtual structs as well as swingometers for the Labour and Liberal
Democrats parties. An online version of the swingometer, featuring Labour and
the Conservatives only, was introduced on the BBC News website at the 2001
general election. In 2005 the online swingometer was substantially re-designed
to include versions featuring the Liberal Democrats, plus information on
specific constituencies - including "VIP" seats - won/ lost on different
swings. For the 2010 general election, the swingometer was placed in a
completely virtual environment and repositioned to appear on the back wall of
the virtual studio, with named constituencies as opposed to virtual MPs. All
three swingometers were updated (Con / Lab, Con / Lib Dem, Lab / Lib Dem) in
this manner. 3D Swingometer. The 3D swingometer is used to illustrate the shift
in election results from the previous election in a three-party system. It is
similar to the '2D' swingometer used in two-party system elections, but uses
the extra dimension to allow swings to occur between three parties. The sum of
all the swings between parties must equal zero. In a three party system, the
most complicated swings will involve a major swing either to or from one
political party, with this swing being made up of two components from each of
the other two parties. For instance there may be a 3% swing towards the Purple
party, consisting of a 2% swing from the Orange party and a 1% swing from the
Brown party. Alternatively, there may be a 5% swing from the Orange party, of
which 3% is towards the Brown party and 2% towards the Purple party. It is
possible to split the swing space up into different regions indicating what the
result would be if the swing indicated occurred linearly across the electorate.
This gives rise to four regions: one each indicating overall control for each
party, and a fourth region indicating no overall control. Where there are
swings directly from one party to a second party with the third party's vote
remaining unchanged, the 3D swingometer clearly indicates that the third party
also benefits slightly from the reduction in vote of the first party. The three
dimensions consist of the two used to create the swing space and the third for
the pendulum to swing in. Parodies. During the 2010 UK General election race,
the *Slapometer website allowed voters to slap along to the live TV debates
between party leaders Gordon Brown, David Cameron and Nick Clegg. Rather than
showing a swing in votes it merely gave feedback about the number of slaps each
politician was receiving each second.
