Swing vote A swing vote is a vote that is seen as potentially going to any of a
number of candidates in an election, or, in a two-party system, may go to
either of the two dominant political parties. Such votes are usually sought
after in elections, since they can play a big role in determining the outcome.
A swing voter or floating voter is a voter who may not be affiliated with a
particular political party (Independent) or who will vote across party lines.
In American politics, many centrists, liberal Republicans and conservative
Democrats are considered "swing voters" since their voting patterns cannot be
predicted with certainty. While the swing voter is ostensibly the target of
most political activity during elections, in countries without compulsory
voting the political parties know that the shift from one party to another is
dependent only to a limited extent on swing voters. Another, arguably larger
factor is the success of one party in comparison to another in getting out its
core support. In a two-party system, those who become disillusioned with their
favored party are more likely to vote third-party or abstain than cross over.
However, in the 24 countries with compulsory voting, voter turnout is often
already very close to 100%, so if the major parties are roughly balanced in
popularity, swing voters can have a marked influence on the outcome. Smaller
groups with voting powers, such as chambers of parliament and supreme courts,
can also have swing voters. Due to these groups' smaller size, an individual
swing voter can hold more power. (For example, on a court of seven judges, of
which three are committed to each side of a case, the seventh judge may be seen
as single-handedly deciding the case.) Profile of a swing voter. In an
election, there are "certain" or "lock" votes - voters who are solidly behind
or partisan to a particular candidate and will not consider changing their
minds whatever the opposition says. Swing voters are undecided about how they
will vote. They are sometimes referred to as undecideds, undecided voters, or
floating voter. In the United States, they may be dissatisfied Republicans or
Democrats who are open to the idea of voting for other parties, or they could
be people who have never had a strong affiliation with any political party, and
will vote depending on certain things that influence them - e.g. healthcare,
benefits, election campaign etc. Some might be people who have never exercised
their right to vote before, such as those just reaching voting age. Some, but
not all, swing voters are considered to be "low-information voters." Because
the votes of swing voters are considered to be "up for grabs", candidates
direct a fair proportion of campaign effort towards them, although they must
also be concerned with voter turnout among their political base. There is a
perception that swing voters are primarily motivated by self-interest rather
than values or ideology, and so are particularly susceptible to pork barreling.
If a constituency contains a large proportion of swing voters it is often
called a marginal seat and extensive campaign resources are poured into it. The
impact of swing voters. Swing voters occasionally play a huge part in
elections. First-time voters and swing voters are usually credited for helping
Jesse Ventura win the Minnesota gubernatorial election in 1998. Swing voters
who support third-party candidates take potential votes away from the major
candidates. Ventura was a third-party candidate; his opponents were seen as two
weak major-party candidates, and this situation created many more swing voters
than usual. This resulted in Ventura, the third-party candidate, winning the
election. Examples of swing voters. Common examples of swing voters include
"Reagan Democrats" (Democrats who voted for Republican Ronald Reagan in the
1980s) and "Clinton Conservatives" (Republicans who voted for Bill Clinton). In
her 2012 book "The Swing Vote", Linda Killian divides the American swing vote
into 4 factions: NPR Republicans, America First Democrats, the Facebook
Generation, and Starbucks Moms and Dads. On the Supreme Court of the United
States, Associate Justices Potter Stewart and Anthony Kennedy have been
described as swing votes between the two factions of the court.
