Systematic ideology Systematic ideology is a study of ideologies founded in the
late 1930s in and around London, England by Harold Walsby, George Walford and
others. It seeks to understand the origin and development of ideologies, how
ideologies and ideological groups work together, and the possibilities of
guiding the development of ideologies on a global scale. The basic premise of
systematic ideology is that ideology is the central motivator in human affairs;
that the characteristics that make up the major ideologies come in sets; that
those sets of characteristics form a series; and that the ideological series
forms a system. History. The group that formed around Harold Walsby and his
ideas was a breakaway from the Socialist Party of Great Britain. During the
Second World War this group developed a fascination with perceived impediments
to mass socialist consciousness among the working class. The theory they
developed was expressed by Walsby himself in his 1947 book "The Domain of
Ideologies" and those involved in the group set up an organisation to propagate
their views called the Social Science Association, which existed from 1944
until 1956, attracting a number of new recruits during the ‘Turner
Controversy’. It was later succeeded by the Walsby Society and the journal
which emerged from it called "Ideological Commentary". From the 1980s onwards,
George Walford, editor of "Ideological Commentary" and former secretary of the
SSA, watered down some of the theory’s more obviously elitist elements and
even left the SPGB money at the time of his death. He did this on the grounds
that although in his view the Party would never help achieve socialism it did
perform a valuable function by demonstrating through its application of
critical analysis, logical thought and theory the limitations of other
political groups that valued these less highly (a perspective which had
informed Harold Walsby’s decision in 1950 to surreptitiously rejoin the Party
through its postal branch and write articles for the "Socialist Standard" under
the pseudonym "H.W.S.Bee"). "Ideological Commentary" survived until the death
of Walford in 1994. , barely a handful of systematic ideology's exponents
remain. Walsby, Walford and their group produced a large number of leaflets,
pamphlets and other literature over time, a fair chunk of it dealing with the
SPGB. The most readable expressions of systematic ideology are Walford’s book
"Beyond Politics", published in 1990, and the pamphlet "Socialist
Understanding", published ten years earlier. Theory. The theory of the group
developed over time and was re-christened ‘systematic ideology’ by Walford
in 1976. Its basic premise was that people’s assumptions and identifications
(the factors making up their ‘ideology’) are not explicable in terms of
material conditions in general and their relationship to the means of
production in particular—and are never likely to be. Instead, there are
persistent and distinct ideological groups in society, cutting across social
classes and forming a series, with the largest groups being most typically
guided in their thoughts and actions by a preference for family, authority,
familiarity and tradition. Politically, these preferences find predominant
expression in the ideas of the large number of so-called ‘non-politicals’
in society, and in Conservatism and then Liberalism (the strength of these
preferences gradually weakening through the series). As the series progresses
further, the next, progressively smaller, ideological groups seek to repress
these identifications and preferences in favor of dynamism, social change,
logical thought and the pursuit of theory as a guide to decision-making, these
being expressed politically in Labourism, more overtly still in Communism and
then, in an ultimate and extreme form, in Anarchism (or ‘Anarchosocialism’,
the purist variety of it allegedly expounded by the Socialist Party of Great
Britain). The more an ideology represses the preferences for family, tradition,
etc. in favour of social change, dynamism and the pursuit of theory as a guide
to action, the fewer in number its adherents are likely to be, with anarchists
(or ‘anarcho-socialists’) being the smallest of all. Those seeking radical
social change, so the theory contends, will always be hampered and restrained
by the enduring preferences of the largest ideological groups. Walford. In his
book, "Beyond Politics", George Walford seeks to analyse ideologies on the
basis of its adherents' surface behaviors, their underlying sentiments and
assumptions ("ethos"), and underlying cognitions ("eidos"). Of particular
interest to him are a single group, "the non-politicals", and five major
political ideologies, "conservatism, liberalism, socialism, communism, and
anarchism", which can be listed as a series, with each seeking to "repress" its
predecessor. He forms a series of hypotheses about the nature of those six
ideologies, observing that they may be gauged upon different dimensions:
according to "relative size and political influence" of its adherents, their
relative "reliance upon theory over practice", and the "degree to which they
sought change". He postulates that the non-politicals have the greatest
influence and least interest in theory, while anarchists exhibit the least
influence and greatest interest in theory, with the rest having mixed degrees
of those properties. He also formulates that each is relative to certain
ideological "ethos": "a) (short-term) expediency, b) (traditional) principles,
c) precision, d) (fundamental) reform, e) revolution, and e) repudiation". By
his formulations, historical change, development of technology, and development
of more complicated social relations can be explained as occurring in stages
along this series. While some other philosophers have expressed the opinion
that political liberalism is the peak or end-stage of historical development
(see Francis Fukuyama's "End of History" thesis), Walford claims the opposite.
"More than ever before, our world is a boiling, bounding, bubbling ferment of
ideological novelty, and the rate of change is accelerating. If the ideological
system has reached completion it is only in the sense that a newborn child is
complete." (Beyond Politics) Criticism. Historically, systematic ideology has
been unable to produce a falsifiable and causal model for what it is that
influences some people and not others to gravitate towards a particular
ideology. Walsby’s early version of the theory was clearly hierarchical (with
those understanding the theory being the smallest group of all, metaphorically
positioned at the apex of a pyramid, just above the SPGB) and it lent itself to
criticism on the grounds that it was merely a particularly convoluted type of
‘human nature’ argument. This was essentially the response outlined in the
"Socialist Standard"’s April 1949 review of Walsby’s book, called "The
Domain of Sterilities".
