Taxila Taxila () is a town and an important archaeological site in the
Rawalpindi District of the Punjab province in Pakistan. Taxila is situated
about northwest of Islamabad Capital Territory and Rawalpindi in Panjab; just
off the Grand Trunk Road. Taxila lies above sea level. It was a part of India
before Pakistan came into being after it divided from India. The city dates
back to the Gandhara period and contains the ruins of the Gandhāran city of
"Takṣaśilā" which was an important Hindu and Buddhist centre, and is still
considered a place of religious and historical sanctity in those traditions. In
1980, Taxila was declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site with multiple locations.
In 2006 it was ranked as the top tourist destination in Pakistan by "The
Guardian" newspaper. References in texts. Scattered references in later works
indicate that Takshashila may have dated back to at least the 5th century BCE.
Takṣaśilā is reputed to derive its name from Takṣa, who was the son of
Bharata, the brother of Rama, and Mandavi. Legend has it that Takṣa ruled a
kingdom called Takṣa Khanda, and founded the city of Takṣaśilā. According
to another theory propounded by Damodar Dharmanand Kosambi, Takṣaśilā is
related to Takṣaka, Sanskrit for "carpenter", and is an alternative name for
the Nāgas of ancient India. In the Great Hindu Epic Mahābhārata, the Kuru
heir Parikṣit was enthroned at Takṣaśilā. Traditionally, it is believed
that the Mahabharata was first recited at Takṣaśilā by Vaishampayana, a
disciple of Vyasa at the behest of the seer Vyasa himself, at the "Sarpa Satra
Yajna" (Snake Sacrifice) of Parikṣit's son Janamejaya. Takshashila is also
described in some detail in later Jātaka tales, written in Sri Lanka around
the 5th century. The Chinese monk Faxian (also called Fa-Hien) writing of his
visit to Taxila in 405 CE, mentions the kingdom of Takshasila (or Chu-cha-shi-
lo) meaning "the severed Head". He says that this name was derived from an
event in the life of Buddha because this is the place "where he gave his head
to a man". Xuanzang (also called Hieun Tsang), another Chinese monk, visited
Taxila in 630 and in 643, and he called the city as Ta-Cha-Shi-Lo. The city
appears to have already been in ruins by his time. Taxila is called "Taxiala "
in Ptolemy’s "Geography". In the "Historia Trium Regum" "(History of the
Three Kings)" composed by John of Hildesheim around 1375, the city is called
"Egrisilla". Political history. Owing to its strategic location, Taxila has
changes hands many times over the centuries, with many empires vying for its
control. Ancient centre of learning. Takshashila became a noted centre of
learning (including the religious teachings of Hinduism) at least several
centuries BCE, and continued to attract students from around the old world
until the destruction of the city in the 5th century. At its height, it has
been suggested that Takshashila exerted a sort of "intellectual suzerainty"
over other centres of learning in India., and its primary concern was not with
elementary, but higher education. Generally, a student entered Takshashila at
the age of sixteen. The Vedas, the ancient and the most revered Hindu
scriptures, and the Eighteen "Silpas" or Arts, which included skills such as
archery, hunting, and elephant lore, were taught, in addition to its law
school, medical school, and school of military science. Students came to
Takshashila from far-off places such as Kashi, Kosala and Magadha, in spite of
the long and arduous journey they had to undergo, on account of the excellence
of the learned teachers there, all recognized as authorities on their
respective subjects. Famous students and teachers. Takshashila had great
influence on the Hindu culture and Sanskrit language. It is perhaps best known
because of its association with Chanakya, also known as Kautilya, the
strategist who guided Chandragupta Maurya and assisted in the founding of the
Mauryan empire. The Arthashastra (Sanskrit for The knowledge of Economics) of
Chanakya, is said to have been composed in Takshashila itself. The Ayurvedic
healer Charaka also studied at Taxila. He also started teaching at Taxila in
the later period. The ancient grammarian Panini, who codified the rules that
would define Classical Sanskrit, has also been part of the community at
Takshashila. The institution is very significant in Buddhist tradition since it
is believed that the Mahāyāna branch of Buddhism took shape there. Jivaka,
the court physician of the Magadha emperor Bimbisara who once cured the Buddha,
and the enlightened ruler of Kosala, Prasenajit, are some important
personalities mentioned in Pali texts who studied at Takshashila. Nature of
education. By some accounts, Taxilla was considered to be amongst the earliest
universities in the world. Others do not consider it a university in the modern
sense, in that the teachers living there may not have had official membership
of particular colleges, and there did not seem to have existed purpose-built
lecture halls and residential quarters in Takshashila, in contrast to the later
Nalanda University. No external authorities like kings or local leaders
subjected the scholastic activities at Takshashila to their control. Each
teacher formed his own institution, enjoying complete autonomy in work,
teaching as many students as he liked and teaching subjects he liked without
conforming to any centralized syllabus. Study terminated when the teacher was
satisfied with the student's level of achievement. In general, specialisation
in a subject took around eight years, though this could be lengthened or
shortened in accordance with the intellectual abilities and dedication of the
student in question. In most cases the "schools" were located within the
teachers' private houses, and at times students were advised to quit their
studies if they were unable to fit into the social, intellectual and moral
atmosphere there. Knowledge was considered too sacred to be bartered for money,
and hence any stipulation that fees ought to be paid was vigorously condemned.
Financial support came from the society at large, as well as from rich
merchants and wealthy parents. Though the number of students studying under a
single Guru sometimes numbered in the hundreds, teachers did not deny education
even if the student was poor; free boarding and lodging was provided, and
students had to do manual work in the household. Paying students like princes
were taught during the day; non-paying ones, at night. Guru Dakshina was
usually expected at the completion of a student's studies, but it was
essentially a mere token of respect and gratitude - many times being nothing
more than a turban, a pair of sandals, or an umbrella. In cases of poor
students being unable to afford even that, they could approach the king, who
would then step in and provide something. Not providing a poor student a means
to supply his Guru's Dakshina was considered the greatest slur on a King's
reputation. Examinations were treated as superfluous, and not considered part
of the requirements to complete one's studies. The process of teaching was
critical and thorough- unless one unit was mastered completely, the student was
not allowed to proceed to the next. No convocations were held upon completion,
and no written "degrees" were awarded, since it was believed that knowledge was
its own reward. Using knowledge for earning a living or for any selfish end was
considered sacrilegious. Students arriving at Takshashila usually had completed
their primary education at home (until the age of eight), and their secondary
education in the Ashrams (between the ages of eight and twelve), and therefore
came to Takshashila chiefly to reach the ends of knowledge in specific
disciplines. Both theoretical and practical aspects of the subjects were
taught, and particular care was taken to ensure competence of students in case
of subjects like medicine, where improper practice could result in disaster.
The list of subjects taught at Takshashila underwent many additions over the
years, with even Greek being taught there after the Alexandrian conquests.
Foreign savants were accorded as much importance as local teachers. Ruins. The
British archaeologist Sir John Marshall conducted excavations over a period of
twenty years in Taxila. The ruins of Taxila contain buildings and Buddhist
stupas located over a large area. The main ruins of Taxila are divided into
three major cities, each belonging to a distinct time period. The oldest of
these is the Hathial area, which yielded surface shards similar to burnished
red wares (or 'soapy red wares') recovered from early phases at Charsadda, and
may date between the 6th century BCE and the late 2nd millennium BCE. Bhir
Mound dates from the 6th century BCE. The second city of Taxila is located at
Sirkap and was built by Greco-Bactrian kings in the 2nd century BCE. The third
and last city of Taxila is at Sirsukh and relates to the Kushan rulers. In
addition to the ruins of the city, a number of buddhist monasteries and stupas
also belong to the Taxila area. Some of the important ruins of this category
include the ruins of the stupa at Dharmarajika, the monastery at Jaulian, the
monastery at Mohra Muradu in addition to a number of stupas. Taxila today.
Present day Taxila is one of the seven Tehsils (sub-district) of Rawalpindi
District. It is spread over an undulating land in the periphery of the Pothohar
Plateau of the Punjab. Situated just outside the capital Islamabad's territory
and communicating with it through Tarnol pass of Margalla Hills. Culture.
Taxila is a mix of wealthy urban and rustic rural environs. Urban residential
areas are in the form of small neat and clean colonies populated by the workers
of heavy industries, educational institutes and hospitals that are located in
the area. Nicholson's obelisk, a monument of British colonial era situated at
the Grand Trunk road welcomes the travellers coming from Rawalpindi/Islamabad
into Taxila. The monument was built by the British to pay tribute to Brigadier
John Nicholson (1822–1857) an officer of the British Army who died in India
during the Indian Rebellion of 1857, also known as the First War of
Independence. In addition to the ruins of Gandhara civilisation and ancient
Buddhist/Hindu culture, relics of Mughal gardens and vestiges of historical
Grand Trunk Road, which was built by Emperor Sher Shah Suri in 15th–16th
centuries, are also found in Taxila region. Industry. The industries include
heavy machine factories and industrial complex, Pakistan Ordnance Factories at
Wah Cantt and the cement factory. Heavy Industries Taxila and Heavy Mechanical
Complex are also based here. Small, cottage and household industries include
stoneware, pottery and footwear. People try to relate the present day stoneware
craft to the tradition of sculpture making that existed here before the advent
of Islam. Taxila Museum, dedicated mainly to the remains of Gandhara
civilization, is also worth visiting. A hotel of the tourism department offers
reasonably good services and hospitality to the tourists. Education. The city
has many educational institutes including HITEC University and the Taxila
campus of University of Engineering and Technology. In March 2012, The Korea
Herald published a news article on tourism in Pakistan, terming Pakistan as "a
land of splendors" detailing on aspects of Pakistani landscape, culture and
heritage. M/s Gandhara Art and Culture from South Korea intends to establish a
post-graduate university, Heritage University of Taxila (HUT), to revive the
ancient educational excellence of Taxila and highlight Gandhara civilization.
Threats. In a 2010 report titled "Saving Our Vanishing Heritage", Global
Heritage Fund identified Taxila as one of 12 worldwide sites most "On the
Verge" of irreparable loss and damage, citing insufficient management,
development pressure, looting, and war and conflict as primary threats.
