Talk About Curing Autism Talk About Curing Autism (TACA) is a nonprofit 501c3
organization founded in 2000 and based in Irvine, California by Lisa Ackerman
when her son was diagnosed and the doctor gave her no hope. TACA provides
information, resources, and support to families affected by autism. TACA aims
to reduce the lag time between autism diagnosis and effective treatments and
endeavors to strengthen the autism community by connecting families and
professionals who can help them, allowing them to share stories and information
to help people with autism be the best they can be. Currently, TACA holds
monthly meetings featuring speakers in many states across the United States.
National spokesperson. In September, 2007, TACA announced the appointment of
its new national spokesperson, Jenny McCarthy, whose son Evan was diagnosed
with an autism spectrum disorder. Evan's recovery from autistic symptoms is
described in his mother's concurrently released fourth book, "Louder than Words
– A Mother’s Journey in Healing Autism". In 2010, Jenny McCarthy distanced
herself from her prior claims that childhood vaccines were to blame for her
son's disorder. Jenny now says she wants vaccinations "better researched" —
rather than getting rid of them altogether, as she previously promoted. Pacific
Life Foundation Grant. In January 2009, TACA received a $300,000 grant from the
Newport Beach-based Pacific Life Foundation. TACA launched three new programs
for Orange County, California families including a Spanish-language program,
the addition on an in house advocate to provide education, training and support
for families, and scholarships that would allow families to procure independent
assessments for their children. All of these programs are offered at no charge
to families affected by families. As a result, TACA now has a Spanish-language
section of their website, En Español, which is a resource for Spanish-speaking
parents of children with autism regardless of their location. Controversy.
TACA, as an organization, prominently supports the research of Andrew
Wakefield, a former physician and autism researcher who was recently shown to
have falsified information about patients who participated in the study that
claimed a link between autism and vaccines. The British Medical Journal
reported that Wakefield was paid more than $675,000 by a lawyer seeking to sue
vaccine makers on the basis that children had developed autism after receiving
MMR vaccinations. An award-winning investigation by Brian Deer for The Sunday
Times of London, the UK’s Channel 4 TV network, and the British Medical
Journal, revealed that the children's medical records show that some clearly
had symptoms of developmental problems long before getting their shots, and
several had no autism diagnosis at all. Wakefield was later barred from
practicing medicine in the United Kingdom by the General Medical Council,
stating that he was found to have acted "dishonestly and irresponsibly".
Despite this, and 41 separate studies listed by the American Academy of
Pediatrics which show no link between vaccines and autism [http://www.aap.org/
immunization/families/faq/vaccinestudies.pdf], TACA continues to promote Andrew
Wakefield, his books, and the stance that childhood immunizations are a
significant contributor to autism spectrum disorders.
