Tax increment financing Tax Increment Financing, or TIF, is a public financing
method that is used for subsidizing redevelopment, infrastructure, and other
community-improvement projects in many countries, including the United States.
Similar or related value capture strategies are used around the world. TIF is a
method to use future gains in taxes to subsidize current improvements, which
are projected to create the conditions for said gains. The completion of a
public project often results in an increase in the value of surrounding real
estate, which generates additional tax revenue. Sales-tax revenue may also
increase, and jobs may be added, although these factors and their multipliers
usually do not influence the structure of TIF. When an increase in site value
and private investment generates an increase in tax revenues, it is the "tax
increment." Tax Increment Financing dedicates tax increments within a certain
defined district to finance the debt that is issued to pay for the project. TIF
is often designed to channel funding toward improvements in distressed,
underdeveloped, or underutilized parts of a jurisdiction where development
might otherwise not occur. TIF creates funding for public or private projects
by borrowing against the future increase in these property-tax revenues.
Currently, thousands of TIF districts operate nationwide in the US, from small
and mid-sized cities, to the State of California. As of 2008, California had
over four hundred TIF districts with an aggregate of over $10 billion per year
in revenues, over $28 billion of long-term debt, and over $674 billion of
assessed land valuation. California, where TIF began in the United States in
1952, has currently discontinued the use of them. Every state including the
District of Columbia, except Arizona and Wyoming, have enabled legislation for
tax increment financing. While some states, such as Illinois, have used TIF for
decades, many others did not pass or amend state laws to allow them to use this
tool until the first decade of the 21st century. Since the 1970s, a reduction
in federal funding for redevelopment-related activities including spending
increases, restrictions on municipal bonds which are tax-exempt bonds, and an
administrative transference of urban policy to local, lower-level governments,
has led many cities to consider tax increment financing. State-imposed caps on
municipal property tax collections and limits on the amounts and types of city
expenditures have also led many local governments to consider this funding
strategy as a way to strengthen tax bases, to attract private investment, and
to increase economic activity. Criticism. TIF districts are not without
criticism. Although tax increment financing is one mechanism for local
governments that does not directly rely on federal funds, some question whether
TIF districts actually serve their resident populations. As investment in an
area increases, it is not uncommon for real estate values to rise and for
gentrification to occur. An organization called Municipal Officials for
Redevelopment Reform (MORR) holds regular conferences on redevelopment abuse.
Examples. Chicago. The city of Chicago, in Cook County, Illinois, has a
significant number of TIF districts and has become a prime location for
examining the benefits and disadvantages of TIF districts. The city runs 131
districts with tax receipts totaling upwards of $500 million for 2006. Lori
Healey, appointed commissioner of the city's Planning and Development
department in 2005 was instrumental in the process of approving TIF districts
as first deputy commissioner. The Chicago Reader, a Chicago alternative
newspaper published weekly, has published articles regarding tax increment
financing districts in and around Chicago. Written by staff writer Ben
Joravsky, the articles are critical of tax increment financing districts as
implemented in Chicago. Cook County Clerk David Orr, in order to bring
transparency to Chicago and Cook County tax increment financing districts,
began to feature information regarding Chicago area districts on his office's
website. The information featured includes City of Chicago TIF revenue by year,
maps of Chicago and Cook County suburban municipalities' TIF districts. The
Neighborhood Capital Budget Group of Chicago, Illinois, a non-profit
organization, advocated for area resident participation in capital programs.
The group also researched and analyzed the expansion of Chicago's TIF
districts. Though the organization closed on February 1, 2007, their research
will be available on their website for six months. Albuquerque. Currently, the
largest TIF project in America is located in Albuquerque, New Mexico: the $500
million Mesa del Sol development. Mesa del Sol is controversial in that the
proposed development would be built upon a "green field" that presently
generates little tax revenue and any increase in tax revenue would be diverted
into a tax increment financing fund. This "increment" thus would leave
governmental bodies without funding from the developed area that is necessary
for the governmental bodies' operation. Alameda, California. In 2009, SunCal
Companies, an Irvine, California based developer, introduced a ballot
initiative that embodied a redevelopment plan for the former Naval Air Station
Alameda and a financial plan based in part on roughly $200 million worth of tax
increment financing to pay for public amenities. SunCal structured the
initiative so that the provision of public amenities was contingent on
receiving tax increment financing, and on the creation of a community
facilities (Mello-Roos) district, which would levy a special (extra) tax on
property owners within the development. Since Alameda City Council did not
extend the Exclusive Negotiation Agreement with Suncal, this project will not
move forward. In California, Community Redevelopment Law governs the use of tax
increment financing by public agencies. Applications and administration. Cities
use TIF to finance public infrastructure, land acquisition, demolition,
utilities and planning costs, and other improvements including sewer expansion
and repair, curb and sidewalk work, storm drainage, traffic control, street
construction and expansion, street lighting, water supply, landscaping, park
improvements, environmental remediation, bridge construction and repair, and
parking structures. State enabling legislation gives local governments the
authority to designate tax increment financing districts. The district usually
lasts 20 years, or enough time to pay back the bonds issued to fund the
improvements. While arrangements vary, it is common to have a city government
assuming the administrative role, making decisions about how and where the tool
is applied. Most jurisdictions only allow bonds to be floated based upon a
portion (usually capped at 50%) of the assumed increase in tax revenues. For
example, if a $5,000,000 annual tax increment is expected in a development,
which would cover the financing costs of a $50,000,000 bond, only a $25,000,000
bond would be typically allowed. If the project is moderately successful, this
would mean that a good portion of the expected annual tax revenues (in this
case over $2,000,000) would be dedicated to other public purposes other than
paying off the bond.
