Tax reform Tax reform is the process of changing the way taxes are collected or
managed by the government. Tax reformers have different goals. Some seek to
reduce the level of taxation of all people by the government. Some seek to make
the tax system more progressive or less progressive. Others seek to simplify
the tax system and make the system more understandable or more accountable.
Numerous organizations have been set up to reform tax systems worldwide, often
with the intent to reform income taxes or value added taxes into something
considered more economically liberal. Other reforms propose tax systems that
attempt to deal with externalities. Georgism claims that various forms of land
tax can both deal with externalities and improve productivity. United States.
There have been many movements in the United States to reform the collection
and management of taxes. During the late 19th century American economist, Henry
George, started a global movement for tax reform whose aim was the abolition of
all forms of taxation other than the Single Tax on land value. The effects of
the movement on taxation policy, although diminished can still be seen in many
parts of the world including Australia, New Zealand, Hong Kong, Taiwan and
Singapore. Efforts to promote this form of tax reform in the United States
continue under the aegis of organizations such as "The Henry George Foundation
of America". During the Bush administration, the President's Advisory Panel for
Federal Tax Reform recommended the removal of the Alternative Minimum Tax.
Several organizations are working for tax reform in the United States including
Americans for Tax Reform, Americans For Fair Taxation and KillYourTaxes.com.
Various proposals have been put forth for tax simplification in the United
States, including the FairTax and various flat tax plans and bipartisan tax
reform proposals. In 2010, Fareed Zakaria proposed what he described as a
"grand bargain" with tax reform for economic adversaries Paul Krugman and Niall
Ferguson; an attempt to bridge their political divide with the creation of a
simple and indirect Federal Sales Tax. Representative Chaka Fattah of
Pennsylvania introduced a bill, H.R. 4646, called the "Debt Free America Act"
that would introduce a 1% financial transaction tax and eliminate federal
income tax. He has introduced bills calling for similar tax reform since 2004,
but the bills have never made it out of committee.
