Temporary duty assignment A temporary duty assignment (TDA), also known as
"temporary additional duty" (TAD), "temporary duty travel" (TDT) or "temporary
duty" (TDY), refers to a United States Government employee travel assignment at
a location other than the employee's permanent duty station. They are usually
of relatively short duration, typically from two days to two months in length.
Not all agencies use this designation. A temporary duty assignment can be to
any location, be it 50 or 5,000 miles away, and some government agencies
mandate they be less than six months in duration. Those agencies that do not
mandate a six month limit consider longer durations to be a Permanent Change of
Station (PCS). Temporary duty assignments usually come with per diem pay,
covering lodging, meals, and incidental expenses. Many employees value the per
diem aspect of a TDA, since that money is guaranteed, even if they spend less
than their allotted daily value. However, some agencies handle the lodging per
diem separately from the meals and incidentals, and employees may not make
money by staying at cheaper accommodations, or putting more than one person in
a room. Typically, an employee may request a cash advance of 60-80% of the
total value of the meals and incidental expenses before the TDA per diem takes
place, in order to prevent the employee from having to use his or her own
money, or putting money on a personal credit card. Government travel cards are
also typically available, though these sometimes carry restrictions on the
types of goods or services that can be purchased with them. Some locations have
furnished apartments for long-term stay. These apartments have fully equipped
kitchens so TDA recipients have an option of cooking rather than eating out all
the time, and some may have free washing machines and clothes dryers. Some
government agencies consider any assignment over 45 days as an extended TDA,
which allows the employee to get reimbursed for part of the expenses before the
end of the assignment.
