Technostructure Technostructure is a term coined by the economist John Kenneth
Galbraith in "The New Industrial State" (1967) to describe the group of
technicians within an enterprise (or an administrative body) with considerable
influence and control on its economy. It usually refers to managerial
capitalism where the managers and other company leading administrators,
scientists, or lawyers retain more power and influence than the shareholders in
the decisional and directional process. Historical context. The power struggle
between the technostructure and the shareholders was first evoked by Thorstein
Veblen in "The Theory of the Leisure Class" (1899), questioning who, among the
managers and the shareholders, should control the enterprise. At the time and
until the end of the 1980s, the shareholders, unable to effectively regroup and
organise themselves, could not exert enough pressure to effectively counter the
managerial decision-making process. After the Second World War, the rapid
augmentation of shareholders further diluted their collective power. This was
perceived, by Galbraith, as a divorce between the property of the capital and
the direction of the enterprise. Goals of the technostructure. Since the
technostructure is composed of an hierarchical system of influential employees
inside the enterprise, its primary goal is not to maximize their profits but
rather survival, continuous growth and maximal size. While it must maintain
acceptable relations with their shareholders, hegemonic growth is more
beneficial to the technostructure. Decline of the technostructure. The lack of
control of the technostructure resulted in managerial abuse notably on its
salaries during the economic crisis of the 1970s. It prompted support for new
economic ideologies like the School of Chicago under Milton Friedman.
Furthermore, the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 forced a much
greater transparency from businesses and possible opposition to their
decisions. In the 1980s, the rising and influential neoliberal ideology decried
the "divorce" between the capital and the decisions. Based on the belief of a
new emerging economy, neoliberal economic theories were introduced at the end
of the 1980s forcing managerial capitalism to yield to the shareholders.
Results. The prime objective of the neoliberal economic theories is the
maximization of the profits in order to maximize stock value. This, quite
evidently, greatly differed from the objectives of the technostructure which
caused massive restructuring in the 1990s. In order to maximize profits,
enterprises now had to take draconian measures to cut expenses and ensure
profits for the shareholders. This greatly encouraged the exportation of manual
or simple tasks to foreign countries where labour is much less expensive and
caused massive layoffs in developed countries. Likewise, it reduced salaries
and caused a decline in income of the working class. Paradoxically, the
salaries of the managers increased and the constant demand for profits played
an important role in the accounting scandals in 2002.
