Terms of trade In international economics and international trade, terms of
trade or TOT is (Price of exportable goods)/(Price of importable goods). In
layman's terms it means what quantity of imports can be purchased through the
sale of a fixed quantity of exports. "Terms of trade" are sometimes used as a
proxy for the relative social welfare of a country, but this heuristic is
technically questionable and should be used with extreme caution. An
improvement in a nation's terms of trade (the increase of the ratio) is good
for that country in the sense that it can buy more imports for any given level
of exports. The terms of trade is influenced by the exchange rate because a
rise in the value of a country's currency lowers the domestic prices for its
imports but does not directly affect the commodities it produces (i.e. its
exports). The term. "Terms of trade" takes a plural form. However, it is a
single number that represents the ratio of the relative prices. Two country
model CIE economics. In the simplified case of two countries and two
commodities, terms of trade is defined as the ratio of the total export revenue
a country receives for its export commodity to the total import revenue it pays
for its import commodity. In this case the imports of one country are the
exports of the other country. For example, if a country exports 50 dollars
worth of product in exchange for 100 dollars worth of imported product, that
country's terms of trade are 50/100 = 0.5. The terms of trade for the other
country must be the reciprocal (100/50 = 2). When this number is falling, the
country is said to have "deteriorating terms of trade". If multiplied by 100,
these calculations can be expressed as a percentage (50% and 200%
respectively). If a country's terms of trade fall from say 100% to 70% (from
1.0 to 0.7), it has experienced a 30% deterioration in its terms of trade. When
doing longitudinal (time series) calculations, it is common to set a value for
the base year to make interpretation of the results easier. In basic
Microeconomics, the terms of trade are usually set in the interval between the
opportunity costs for the production of a given good of two countries. Terms of
trade is the ratio of a country's export price index to its import price index,
multiplied by 100. The terms of trade measures the rate of exchange of one good
or service for another when two countries trade with each other. Multi-
commodity multi-country model. In the more realistic case of many products
exchanged between many countries, terms of trade can be calculated using a
Laspeyres index. In this case, a nation's terms of trade is the ratio of the
Laspeyre price index of exports to the Laspeyre price index of imports. The
Laspeyre export index is the current value of the base period exports divided
by the base period value of the base period exports. Similarly, the Laspeyres
import index is the current value of the base period imports divided by the
base period value of the base period imports. Where Export Price Over Import
price times 100 If the percentage is over 100% then your economy is doing well
(Capital Accumulation). If the percentage is under 100% then your economy is
not going well (More money going out than coming in). Limitations. Terms of
trade should not be used as synonymous with social welfare, or even Pareto
economic welfare. Terms of trade calculations do not tell us about the volume
of the countries' exports, only relative changes between countries. To
understand how a country's social utility changes, it is necessary to consider
changes in the volume of trade, changes in productivity and resource
allocation, and changes in capital flows. The price of exports from a country
can be heavily influenced by the value of its currency, which can in turn be
heavily influenced by the interest rate in that country. If the value of
currency of a particular country is increased due to an increase in interest
rate one can expect the terms of trade to improve. However this may not
necessarily mean an improved standard of living for the country since an
increase in the price of exports perceived by other nations will result in a
lower volume of exports. As a result, exporters in the country may actually be
struggling to sell their goods in the international market even though they are
enjoying a (supposedly) high price. In the real world of over 200 nations
trading hundreds of thousands of products, terms of trade calculations can get
very complex. Thus, the possibility of errors is significant.
