The Experience Economy The term "Experience Economy" was first described in an
article published in 1998 by B. Joseph Pine II and James H. Gilmore, titled
"The Experience Economy". In it they described the experience economy as the
next economy following the agrarian economy, the industrial economy, and the
most recent service economy. This concept had been previously researched by
many other authors (see History of the Concept). Pine and Gilmore argue that
businesses must orchestrate memorable events for their customers, and that
memory itself becomes the product - the "experience". More advanced experience
businesses can begin charging for the value of the "transformation" that an
experience offers, e.g., as education offerings might do if they were able to
participate in the value that is created by the educated individual. This, they
argue, is a natural progression in the value added by the business over and
above its inputs. Although the concept of the Experience Economy was born in
the business field, it has crossed its frontiers to tourism, architecture,
nursing, urban planners and other fields. The Experience Economy is also
considered to be the main underpinning for customer experience management.
Within the hospitality management academic programs in the US and Europe,
Experience Economy is often shortened to Exponomy and is of increasing focus.
History of the concept. This customer behavior in the society has been
acknowledged by various authors. An early example is the book of Alvin Toffler,
Future Shock, which Pine and Gilmore quote in their work. In 1971, Toffler
criticized how “economists have great difficulty imagining alternatives to
communism and capitalism”, and how they could only envision the economy in
the terms of scarcity of resources. He talked about the upcoming
“experiential industry”, in which people in the “future”, would be
willing to allocate high percentages of their salaries to live amazing
experiences. Later in 1982, Holbrook and Hirschman’s pioneering article "The
Experiential Aspects of Consumption: Consumer Fantasies, Feelings, and Fun" in
the Journal of Consumer Research (Vol. 9, #2), discussed emotional experiences
linked to products and services. Then in 1992, the German sociologist Gerhard
Schulze argued for the idea of the “experience society” in his book
"Erlebnisgesellschaft", which was translated into English as "The Experience
Society" in 1995. In 1999, it was published at the same time a twin book of
"The Experience Economy", that is "The Dream Society" by Rolf Jensen of the
Copenhagen Institute for Futures Studies, containing many of the same ideas.
Stages of marketing a product or service. A core argument is that because of
technology, increasing competition,and the increasing expectations of
consumers, services today are starting to look like commodities. Products can
be placed on a continuum from undifferentiated (referred to as commodities) to
highly differentiated. Just as service markets build on goods markets which in
turn build on commodity markets, so transformation and experience markets build
on these newly commoditized services, e.g. Internet bandwidth, consulting help.
Proceeding to the next stage more or less requires giving away products at the
more commodified level. For instance, to charge for a service such as new car
warranties, one must be prepared to give away new cars to replace "lemons". And
to charge for transformations, one must be prepared to risk not being paid for
the time one spends working with customers who don't "transform". Pine and
Gilmore draw on Walt Disney, AOL, Nordstrom, Starbucks, Saturn, Kanye West, IBM
and many others as examples. Criticisms. Pine and Gilmore's thesis has been
criticized as an example of an over-hyped business philosophy arising from or
in the dot-com boom and a rising economy in the U.S. that was tolerant of high
prices, inflated claims, and no limitations of supply or investment. Detractors
contrast it with other service economy theses such as Natural Capitalism, in
which there is a clear focus on making measurably better use of scarce
resources, usually considered to be the basis of economics. They claim service
management should stress efficiency more than effectiveness. The thesis has
also been criticized from within the fields of tourism, leisure and hospitality
studies where theories as to the role of experiences in the economy were
already well established prior to the work of Pine and Gilmore but were not
acknowledged by Pine and Gilmore in their work. Although continuing to
influence business thinking the concept has already been superseded within much
service marketing and management literature by the argument that the value of
all goods and services are co-created or co-produced through the interaction of
consumers and producers. Therefore, at one level of abstraction all consumption
can be understood in experiential terms.
