The Republic (Plato) The Republic (, "Politeia") is a Socratic dialogue written
by Plato around 380 BC concerning the definition of justice and the order and
character of the just city-state and the just man. The dramatic date of the
dialogue has been much debated and though it must take place some time during
the Peloponnesian War, "there would be jarring anachronisms if any of the
candidate specific dates between 432 and 404 were assigned". It is Plato's
best-known work and has proven to be one of the most intellectually and
historically influential works of philosophy and political theory. In it,
Socrates along with various Athenians and foreigners discuss the meaning of
justice and examine whether or not the just man is happier than the unjust man
by considering a series of different cities coming into existence "in speech",
culminating in a city (Kallipolis) ruled by philosopher-kings; and by examining
the nature of existing regimes. The participants also discuss the theory of
forms, the immortality of the soul, and the roles of the philosopher and of
poetry in society. Structure. Three interpretations of the "Republic" are
presented; they are not exhaustive in their treatments of the work, but are
examples of contemporary interpretation. Bertrand Russell. The core of the
second part is discussed in the Allegory of the Cave, and articles related to
the Theory of (ideal) forms. The third part concerns the Five regimes and is
strongly related to The Laws dialogue; and the Myth of Er. Cornford,
Hildebrandt and Voegelin subdivisions. The paradigm of the city — the idea of
the Good, the "Agathon" — has manifold historical embodiments, undertaken by
those who have seen the Agathon, and are ordered via the vision. The centre
piece of the "Republic", Part II, numbers 2–3, discusses the rule of the
philosopher, and the vision of the Agathon with the allegory of the cave, which
is clarified in the theory of forms. The centre piece is preceded and followed
by the discussion of the means that will secure a well-ordered "polis" (City).
Part II, no. 1, concerns marriage, the community of people and goods for the
Guardians, and the restraints on warfare among the Hellenes. It describes a
partially communistic "polis". Part II, no. 4, deals with the philosophical
education of the rulers who will preserve the order and character of the city-
state. In Part II, the "Embodiment of the Idea", is preceded by the
establishment of the economic and social orders of a "polis" (Part I), followed
by an analysis (Part III) of the decline the order must traverse. The three
parts compose the main body of the dialogues, with their discussions of the
“paradigm”, its embodiment, its genesis, and its decline. The Introduction
and the Conclusion are the frame for the body of the "Republic". The discussion
of right order is occasioned by the questions: “Is Justice better than
Injustice?” and “Will an Unjust man fare better than a Just man?” The
introductory question is balanced by the concluding answer: “Justice is
preferable to Injustice”. In turn, the foregoing are framed with the
"Prologue" (Book I) and the "Epilogue" (Book X). The prologue is a short
dialogue about the common public "doxai" (opinions) about “Justice”. Based
upon faith, and not reason, the "Epilogue" describes the new arts and the
immortality of the soul. Topics. Definition of justice. In the first book, two
definitions of justice are proposed but deemed inadequate. Returning debts
owed, and helping friends while harming enemies, are common sense definitions
of justice that, Socrates shows, are inadequate in exceptional situations, and
thus lack the rigidity demanded of a definition. Yet he does not completely
reject them, for each expresses a common sense notion of justice which Socrates
will incorporate into his discussion of the just regime in books II through V.
At the end of Book I, Socrates agrees with Polemarchus that justice includes
helping friends, but says the just man would never do harm to anybody.
Thrasymachus believes that Socrates has done the men present an injustice by
saying this and attacks his character and reputation in front of the group,
partly because he suspects that Socrates himself does not even believe harming
enemies is unjust. Thrasymachus gives his understanding of justice and
injustice as "justice is what is advantageous to the stronger, while injustice
is to one's own profit and advantage". Socrates finds this definition unclear
and begins to question Thrasymachus. Socrates then asks whether the ruler who
makes a mistake by making a law that lessens their well-being, is still a ruler
according to that definition. Thrasymachus agrees that no true ruler would make
such an error. This agreement allows Socrates to undermine Thrasymachus' strict
definition of justice by comparing rulers to people of various professions.
Thrasymachus consents to Socrates' assertion that an artist is someone who does
his job well, and is a knower of some art, which allows him to complete the job
well. In so doing Socrates gets Thrasymachus to admit that rulers who enact a
law that does not benefit them firstly, are in the precise sense "not" rulers.
Thrasymachus gives up, and is silent from then on. Socrates has trapped
Thrasymachus into admitting the strong man who makes a mistake is not the
strong man in the precise sense, and that some type of knowledge is required to
rule perfectly. However, it is far from a satisfactory definition of justice.
At the beginning of Book II, Plato's two brothers challenge Socrates to define
justice in the man, and unlike the rather short and simple definitions offered
in Book I, their views of justice are presented in two independent speeches.
Glaucon's speech reprises Thrasymachus' idea of justice; it starts with the
legend of Gyges who discovered a ring that gave him the power to become
invisible. Glaucon uses this story to argue that no man would be just if he had
the opportunity of doing injustice with impunity. With the power to become
invisible, Gyges is able to seduce the queen, murder the king, and take over
the kingdom. Glaucon argues that the just as well as the unjust man would do
the same if they had the power to get away with injustice exempt from
punishment. The only reason that men are just and praise justice is out of fear
of being punished for injustice. The law is a product of compromise between
individuals who agree not to do injustice to others if others will not do
injustice to them. Glaucon says that if people had the power to do injustice
without fear of punishment, they would not enter into such an agreement.
Glaucon uses this argument to challenge Socrates to defend the position that
the unjust life is better than the just life. Adeimantus adds to Glaucon's
speech the charge that men are only just for the results that justice brings
one- fortune, honor, reputation. Adeimantus challenges Socrates to prove that
being just is worth something in and of itself, not only as a means to an end.
Socrates says that there is no better topic to debate. In response to the two
views of injustice and justice presented by Glaucon and Adeimantus, he claims
incompetence, but feels it would be impious to leave justice in such doubt.
Thus the "Republic" sets out to define justice. Given the difficulty of this
task as proven in Book I, Socrates in Book II leads his interlocutors into a
discussion of justice in the city, which Socrates suggests may help them see
justice not only in the person, but on a larger scale, "first in cities
searching for what it is; then thusly we could examine also in some individual,
examining the likeness of the bigger in the idea of the littler" For over two
and a half millennia, scholars have differed on the aptness of the city-soul
analogy Socrates uses to find justice in Books II through V. The "Republic" is
a dramatic dialogue, not a treatise. Socrates' definition of justice is never
unconditionally stated, only versions of justice within each city are "found"
and evaluated in Books II through Book V. Socrates constantly refers the
definition of justice back to the conditions of the city for which it is
created. He builds a series of myths, or noble lies, to make the cities appear
just, and these conditions moderate life within the communities. The "earth
born" myth makes all men believe that they are born from the earth and have
predestined natures within their veins. Accordingly, Socrates defines justice
as "working at that which he is naturally best suited," and "to do one's own
business and not to be a busybody" (433a-433b) and goes on to say that justice
sustains and perfects the other three cardinal virtues: Temperance, Wisdom, and
Courage, and that justice is the cause and condition of their existence.
Socrates does not include justice as a virtue within the city, suggesting that
justice does not exist within the human soul either, rather it is the result of
a "well ordered" soul. A result of this conception of justice separates people
into three types; that of the soldier, that of the producer, and that of a
ruler. If a ruler can create just laws, and if the warriors can carry out the
orders of the rulers, and if the producers can obey this authority, then a
society will be just. The city is challenged by Adeimantus and Glaucon
throughout its development: Adeimantus cannot find happiness in the city, and
Glaucon cannot find honor and glory. Ultimately Socrates constructs a city in
which there is no private property, women and children are held in common
(449c-450c, 3 times), and there is no philosophy for the lower castes. All is
sacrificed to the common good and doing what is best fitting to your nature;
however, is the city itself to nature? In Book V Socrates addresses this issue,
making some assertions about the equality of the sexes (454d). Yet the issue
shifts in Book VI to whether this city is possible, not whether it is a just
city. The rule of philosopher-kings appear as the issue of possibility is
raised. Socrates never positively states what justice is in the human soul, it
appears he has created a city where justice is lost, not even needed, since the
perfect ordering of the community satisfies the needs of justice in human
races' less well ordered cities. In terms of why it is best to be just rather
than unjust for the individual, Plato prepares an answer in Book IX consisting
of three main arguments. Plato says that a tyrant's nature will leave him with
"horrid pains and pangs" and that the typical tyrant engages in a lifestyle
that will be physically and mentally exacting on such a ruler. Such a
disposition is in contrast to the truth-loving philosopher king, and a tyrant
"never tastes of true freedom or friendship." The second argument proposes that
of all the different types of people, only the Philosopher is able to judge
which type of ruler is best since only he can see the Form of the Good.
Thirdly, Plato argues, "Pleasures which are approved of by the lover of wisdom
and reason are the truest." In sum, Plato argues that philosophical pleasure is
the only true pleasure since other pleasures experienced by others are simply a
neutral state free of pain. Socrates points out the human tendency to be
corrupted by power leads down the road to timocracy, oligarchy, democracy and
tyranny. From this, he concludes that ruling should be left to philosophers,
who are the most just and therefore least susceptible to corruption. This "good
city" is depicted as being governed by philosopher-kings; disinterested persons
who rule not for their personal enjoyment but for the good of the city-state
(polis). The paradigmatic society which stands behind every historical society
is hierarchical, but social classes have a marginal permeability; there are no
slaves, no discrimination between men and women. The men and women are both to
be taught the same things, so they are both able to be used for the same things
(451e). In addition to the ruling class of guardians (phulakes), which
abolished riches, there is a class of private producers (demiourgoi), who may
be rich or poor. A number of provisions aim to avoid making the people weak:
the substitution of a universal educational system for men and women instead of
debilitating music, poetry and theatre—a startling departure from Greek
society. These provisions apply to all classes, and the restrictions placed on
the philosopher-kings chosen from the warrior class and the warriors are much
more severe than those placed on the producers, because the rulers must be kept
away from any source of corruption. In Books V-VI the abolition of riches among
the guardian class (not unlike Max Weber's bureaucracy) leads controversially
to the abandonment of the typical family, and as such no child may know his or
her parents and the parents may not know their own children. Socrates tells a
tale which is the "allegory of the good government". No nepotism, no private
goods. The rulers assemble couples for reproduction, based on breeding
criteria. Thus, stable population is achieved through eugenics and social
cohesion is projected to be high because familial links are extended towards
everyone in the City. Also the education of the youth is such that they are
taught of only works of writing that encourage them to improve themselves for
the state's good, and envision (the) god(s) as entirely good, just, and the
author(s) of only that which is good. In Books VII-X stand Plato's criticism of
the forms of government. It begins with the dismissal of timocracy, a sort of
authoritarian regime, not unlike a military dictatorship. Plato offers an
almost psychoanalytical explanation of the "timocrat" as one who saw his father
humiliated by his mother and wants to vindicate "manliness". The third worst
regime is oligarchy, the rule of a small band of rich people, millionaires that
only respect money. Then comes the democratic form of government, and its
susceptibility to being ruled by unfit "sectarian" demagogues. Finally the
worst regime is tyranny, where the whimsical desires of the ruler became law
and there is no check upon arbitrariness. Theory of universals. The "Republic"
contains Plato's "Allegory of the cave" with which he explains his concept of
The Forms as an answer to the problem of universals. The allegory of the cave
primarily depicts Plato's distinction between the world of appearances and the
'real' world of the Forms, as well as helping to justify the philosopher's
place in society as king. Plato imagines a group of people who have lived their
entire lives as prisoners, chained to the wall of a cave in the subterranean so
they are unable to see the outside world behind them. However a constant flame
illuminates various moving objects outside, which are silhouetted on the wall
of the cave visible to the prisoners. These prisoners, through having no other
experience of reality, ascribe forms to these shadows such as either "dog" or
"cat". Plato then goes on to explain how the philosopher is akin to a prisoner
who is freed from the cave. The prisoner is initially blinded by the light,
however, when he adjusts to the brightness he sees the fire and the statues and
how they caused the images witnessed inside the cave. He would see that the
fire and statues in the cave were just copies of the real objects; merely
imitations. This is analogous to the Forms. What we see from day to day are
merely appearances, reflections of the Forms. The philosopher, however, will
not be deceived by the shadows and will hence be able to see the 'real' world,
the world above that of appearances; the philosopher will gain knowledge of
things in themselves. In this analogy the sun is representative of the Good.
This is the main object of the philosopher's knowledge. The Good can be thought
of as the form of Forms, or the structuring of the world as a whole. The
prisoner's stages of understanding correlate with the levels on the divided
line which he imagines. The line is divided into what the visible world is and
what the intelligible world is, with the divider being the Sun. When the
prisoner is in the cave, he is obviously in the visible realm that receives no
sunlight, and outside he comes to be in the intelligible realm. The shadows
witnessed in the cave correspond to the lowest level on Plato's line, that of
imagination and conjecture. Once the prisoner is freed and sees the shadows for
what they are he reaches the second stage on the divided line, the stage of
belief, for he comes to believe that the statues in the cave are real. On
leaving the cave, however, the prisoner comes to see objects more real than the
statues inside of the cave, and this correlates with the third stage on Plato's
line, understanding. Lastly, the prisoner turns to the sun which he grasps as
the source of truth, or the Form of the Good, and this last stage, named as
dialectic, is the highest possible stage on the line. The prisoner, as a result
of the Form of the Good, can begin to understand all other forms in reality. At
the end of this allegory, Plato asserts that it is the philosopher's burden to
reenter the cave. Those who have seen the ideal world, he says, have the duty
to educate those in the material world. Since the philosopher recognizes what
is truly good only he is fit to rule society according to Plato. The
dialectical forms of government. While Plato spends much of the "Republic"
having Socrates narrate a conversation about the city he founds with Glaucon
and Adeimantus "in speech", the discussion eventually turns to considering four
regimes that exist in reality and tend to degrade successively into each other:
timocracy, oligarchy (also called plutocracy), democracy and tyranny (also
called despotism). Timocracy Socrates defines a timocracy as a government ruled
by people who love honor and are selected according to the degree of honor they
hold in society. Oligarchy These temptations create a confusion between
economic status and honor which is responsible for the emergence of oligarchy.
In Book VIII, Socrates suggests that wealth will not help a pilot to navigate
his ship. The injustice of economic disparity divides the rich and the poor,
thus creating an environment for criminals and beggars to emerge. The rich are
constantly plotting against the poor and vice versa. Democracy As this
socioeconomic divide grows, so do tensions between social classes. From the
conflicts arising out of such tensions, democracy replaces the oligarchy
preceding it. The poor overthrow the inexperienced oligarchs and soon grant
liberties and freedoms to citizens. A visually appealing demagogue is soon
lifted up to protect the interests of the lower class. However, with too much
freedom, the people become drunk, and tyranny takes over. Tyranny The excessive
freedoms granted to the citizens of a democracy ultimately leads to a tyranny,
the furthest regressed type of government. These freedoms divide the people
into three socioeconomic classes: the dominating class, the elites and the
commoners. Tensions between the dominating class and the elites cause the
commoners to seek out protection of their democratic liberties. They invest all
their power in their democratic demagogue, who, in turn, becomes corrupted by
the power and becomes a tyrant with a small entourage of his supporters for
protection and absolute control of his people. Reception and interpretation.
Ancient Greece. The idea of writing treatises on systems of government was
followed some decades later by Plato's most prominent pupil Aristotle. He wrote
a treatise for which he used another Greek word "politika" in the title. The
title of Aristotle's work is conventionally translated to "politics": see
"Politics" (Aristotle). Aristotle's treatise was not written in dialogue
format: it systematises many of the concepts brought forward by Plato in his
"Republic", in some cases leading the author to a different conclusion as to
what options are the most preferable. It has been suggested that Isocrates
parodies the "Republic" in his work "Busiris" by showing Callipolis' similarity
to the Egyptian state founded by a king of that name. Zeno of Citium, the
founder of Stoicism, wrote his own imitation of Plato's "Republic", c. 300 BC.
"Zeno's Republic" advocates a form of anarchism in which all of the citizens
are philosophers, and advocates a more radical form of sexual communism than
that proposed by Plato. Ancient Rome. Cicero. The English translation of the
title of Plato's dialogue is derived from Cicero's "De re publica", a dialogue
written some three centuries later. Cicero's dialogue imitates the style of the
Platonic dialogues, and treats many of the topics touched upon in Plato's
"Republic". Scipio Africanus, the main character of Cicero's dialogue expresses
his esteem for Plato and Socrates when they are talking about the "Res
publica". "Res publica" is not an exact translation of the Greek word
"politeia" that Plato used in the title of his dialogue: "politeia" is a
general term indicating the various forms of government that could be used and
were used in a "Polis" or city-state. While in Plato's "Republic" Socrates and
his friends discuss the nature of the city and are engaged in providing the
foundations of every state they are living in - which was Athenian democracy,
oligarchy or tyranny - in Cicero's "De re publica" all comments, are more
parochial about (the improvement of) the organization of the state the
participants live in, which was the Roman Republic in its final stages.
Tacitus. The point Tacitus develops in the paragraphs immediately preceding and
following that sentence is that the minute analysis and description of how a
real state was governed, as he does in his "Annals", however boring the related
facts might be, has more practical lessons about good vs. bad governance, than
philosophical treatises on the ideal form of government have. Augustine. In the
pivotal era of Rome's move from its ancient polytheist religion to
Christianity, Augustine wrote his magnum opus "The City of God": again, the
references to Plato, Aristotle and Cicero and their visions of the ideal state
were legion: Augustine equally described a model of the "ideal city", in his
case the eternal Jerusalem, using a visionary language not unlike that of the
preceding philosophers. Hegel. For Hegel, Plato's Republic is not an abstract
theory or ideal which is beyond, or too good for the real nature of man, but is
not ideal enough, it is not good enough for the ideals which were already
inherent or nascent in the reality of his time; a time when Greece was about to
enter decline. One such nascent idea was about to crush the Greek way of life.
The real idea of individual freedom, Hegel avers, was what destroyed the
ancient Greek way of life, and therefore Modern freedoms— or, Christian
freedoms, in Hegel's view —such as the free choice: of the class to which one
belongs, of what property to possess or which career to follow, were excluded
from Plato's Republic: Greece was at a crossroads, Plato's new "constitution,"
defined in The Republic, was an attempt to preserve Greece, or, in modern
terms, it was a reactionary reply to the new freedoms of private property,
etc., that were only given legal form through Rome and in ethical life through
a religion that elevated all individuals, metaphorically or not, to be the
possessors of an immortal soul. 20th century. Gadamer. In his 1934 "Plato und
die Dichter" (Plato and the Poets), as well as several other works, Hans-Georg
Gadamer describes the utopic city of the "Republic" as a heuristic utopia that
should not be pursued or even be used as an orientation-point for political
development. Rather, its purpose is said to be to show how things would have to
be connected, and how one thing would lead to another — often with highly
problematic results — if one would opt for certain principles and carry them
through rigorously. This interpretation argues that large passages in Plato's
writing are ironic, a line of thought initially pursued by Kierkegaard. Popper.
The city portrayed in the "Republic" struck some critics as unduly harsh,
rigid, and unfree; indeed, as a kind of precursor to modern totalitarianism.
Karl Popper gave a voice to that view in his 1945 book "The Open Society and
Its Enemies". Popper singled out Plato's state as a utopia which was argued by
Plato to be the destiny of man. In particular, Popper thought Plato's
envisioned state had totalitarian features as it advocated a government not
elected by its citizens, with the identification of the ruling class' interests
as being the fate and direction of the state. In addition, Plato's state aimed
at autarky, and advocated censorship according to Popper. Voegelin. Eric
Voegelin in "Plato and Aristotle" (Baton Rouge, 1957), gave meaning to the
concept of ‘Just City in Speech’ (Books II-V). For instance, there is
evidence in the dialogue that Socrates himself would not be a member of his
'ideal' state. His life was almost solely dedicated to the private pursuit of
knowledge. More practically, Socrates suggests that members of the lower
classes could rise to the higher ruling class, and vice versa, if they had
‘gold’ in their veins. It is a crude version of the concept of social
mobility. The exercise of power is built on the ‘Noble Lie’ that all men
are brothers, born of the earth, yet there is a clear hierarchy and class
divisions. There is a tri-partite explanation of human psychology that is
extrapolated to the city, the relation among peoples. There is no family among
the guardians, another crude version of Max Weber's concept of bureaucracy as
the state non-private concern. Together with Leo Strauss, Voegelin considered
Popper's interpretation to be a gross misunderstanding not only of the dialogue
itself, but of the very nature and character of Plato's entire philosophic
enterprise. Strauss and Bloom. Some of Plato’s proposals have led theorists
like Leo Strauss and Allan Bloom to ask readers to consider the possibility
that Socrates was creating not a blueprint for a real city, but a learning
exercise for the young men in the dialogue. There are many points in the
construction of the "Just-City-in-Speech" that seem contradictory, which raise
the possibility Socrates is employing irony to make the men in the dialogue
question for themselves the ultimate value of the proposals. In turn, Plato has
immortalized this ‘learning exercise’ in the "Republic". One of many
examples is that Socrates calls the marriages of the ruling class 'sacred';
however, they last only one night and are the result of manipulating and
drugging couples into predetermined intercourse with the aim of eugenically
breeding guardian-warriors. Strauss and Bloom's interpretations, however,
involve more than just pointing out inconsistencies; by calling attention to
these issues they ask readers to think more deeply about whether Plato is being
ironic or genuine, for neither Strauss nor Bloom present an unequivocal
opinion, preferring to raise philosophic doubt over interpretive fact. Leo
Strauss's approach developed out of a belief that Plato wrote esoterically. The
basic acceptance of the exoteric-esoteric distinction revolves around whether
Plato really wanted to see the "Just-City-in-Speech" of Books V-VI come to
pass, or whether it is just an allegory. Strauss never regarded this as the
crucial issue of the dialogue. He argued against Karl Popper's literal view,
citing Cicero's opinion that the "Republic's" true nature was to bring to light
the nature of political things. In fact, Strauss undermines the justice found
in the "Just-City-in-Speech" by implying the city is not natural, it is a man-
made conceit that abstracts away from the erotic needs of the body. The city
founded in the "Republic" "is rendered possible by the abstraction from eros."
An argument that has been used against ascribing ironic intent to Plato is that
Plato's Academy produced a number of tyrants, men who seized political power
and abandoned philosophy for ruling a city. Despite being well-versed in Greek
and having direct contact with Plato himself, some of Plato's former students
like Clearchus, tyrant of Heraclea; Chairon, tyrant of Pellene; Eurostatos and
Choriskos, tyrants of Skepsis; Hermias of Atarneus and Assos; and Calippus,
tyrant of Syracuse ruled people and did not impose anything like a philosopher-
kingship. However, it can be argued whether these men became "tyrants" through
studying in the Academy. Plato's school had an elite student body, part of
which would by birth, and family expectation, end up in the seats of power.
Additionally, it is important to remember that it is by no means obvious that
these men were tyrants in the modern, totalitarian sense of the concept.
Finally, since very little is actually known about what was taught at Plato's
Academy, there is no small controversy over whether it was in fact even in the
business of teaching politics at all. Views on the city-soul analogy. Some
critics (like Julia Annas) have adhered to this premise that the dialogue's
entire political construct exists to serve as an analogy for the individual
soul, in which there are also various potentially competing or conflicting
"members" that might be integrated and orchestrated under a just and productive
"government." Practicality. All these 20th-century views have something in
common: they view it as a theoretical work, not a set of guidelines for good
governance. Plato scholars see it as their task to provide the background
knowledge that is needed to gain a fair understanding of what was meant by the
author of the "Republic". Then the uniqueness of the "Republic" shows up in the
way it clarifies genuine connections of political causes and effects in real
life, precisely by providing them with a heuristically rich context.
Nonetheless Bertrand Russell argues that at least in "intent", and all in all
not so far from what was possible in ancient Greek city-states, the form of
government portrayed in the "Republic" was meant as a practical one by Plato.
