The Mischief Makers The Mischief Makers are a group of activists and artists
based in Nottingham (UK) who formed early 2005 as a creative response to the G8
Summit, held at Gleneagles Hotel, Scotland in July that year. The collective
uses creativity to support community, environmental and social justice campaign
and activist groups. The group's aim is "to inspire people and empower them to
identify challenges and take action in their local environment". Background.
Early 2005 a benefit event in aid of the Tsunami Disaster was organised in
various venues around Nottingham, UK. Two local artists made Geisha-like
costumes and performed an interactive theatre piece on the streets, trying to
get public to interact with the costumes and the "wish fishes" to engage with
the issues related to the disaster. Afterwards, the costumes were altered and
used as an interactive way of engaging with people on the issues of debt,
poverty and climate change as the Summit of the G8 was approaching. During the
spring of 2005, various kimono-making workshops asked people to "join the
geisha of gaiety on a passionate mission of peace and progression, when 8 men
think to meet undisturbed, unruffled and untroubled to decide upon the worlds
future". A "Geisha Bloc" took part in the Make Poverty History march in
Edinburgh on July 2 and others took their costumes to the camp in Stirling for
direct action planned to disturb the summit. List of earlier actions Projects.
Supporting the NAIL Campaign. Nottingham Against Incineration and Landfill
stepped up its campaign mid 2005 after the proposed expansion of Eastcroft
Incinerator was announced. The expansion has been rather controversial as
Sneinton, the most affected area has been dealing with various health problems
as a consequence of the incinerator being very close. The Mischief Makers have
supported the NAIL Campaign on numerous occasions with bannerdrops, awareness
raising, fundraising and during demonstrations and protests with costumes,
puppets and performance. About the campaign: "NAIL (Nottingham Against
Incineration and Landfill) was originally set up in 2002 by a group of local
environmental campaigners. We decided to form a pressure group, when a woman
who developed breast cancer approached members of Nottingham Greenpeace. She
claimed that there was two other ladies, who shared her office for many years
overlooking the incinerator plant, had also developed cancer, one of whom had
died. They were believed that their condition was caused by their prolonged
exposure to pollution from Eastcroft incinerator. The group developed and was
joined by local residents of the Eastcroft Incinerator. We have since gained
growing support, since the expansion announcement." List of actions Supporting
the No Border Network. In October 2005 a new piece called 'The Solidarity
Sisters' was developed to support the work of the No Borders Network, which aim
is to spread the message of soldarity with refugees and those seeking asylum in
the UK. One Solidarity Sister explains: "We have appeared in these costumes a
couple of times in Nottingham and in Sheffield. We dress in little white
dresses, with one of us in lederhosen and hats and bags.. It's about showing
solidarity. It's more a sort of universal image. On the bands and the skirts
there's lots of images of people holding hands. It's about spreading equality,
friendship and acceptance. We look a little bit like aid nurses. Like it's
about having a helping hand. Being there to support people. The dresses were
made from reclaimed fabrics. They were used for car seat padding. It's good to
be reusing stuff." About the No Border Network: "The no border network is a
tool for all groups and grass root organizations who work on the questions of
migrants and asylum seekers in order to struggle alongside with them for
freedom of movement, for the freedom for all to stay in the place which they
have chosen, against repression and the many controls which multiply the
borders everywhere in all countries.". List of actions The Art and Activism
Caravan. The Art and Activism Caravan was a project initiated by the Amsterdam
based youth organisation European Youth For Action in which The Mischief Makers
took place. Its idea was to "support and connect youth, campaign, community and
activist groups, their actions and campaigns with creative forms of activism.".
Also known as the 'AA Caravan' a group of around 10 people travelled from
Greece via Macedonia, Albania, Montenegro, Serbia and Hungary to the
environmental youth Ecotopia gathering in Slovakia. The Caravan worked
intensively with numerous groups over a 3 month period. List of groups involved
List of actions The Climate Camp. The Camp for Climate Action, also known as
the 'Climate Camp' was held in Barlow, Selby, North West Yorkshire to push for
action on the issue of climate change. Over 600 people came together for 10
days to follow workshops, share skills and take action. The camp was set up
near Drax power station, the largest coal fired power station in Europe and the
biggest single contributor to CO2 emissions in the UK. The Mischief Makers made
a giant ostrich puppet which was taken on the 'kids march' to Drax Power
Station on Thursday 31 August 2006 and seized by the police. Chief Inspector
Barry Smith told the BBC "a giant home-made ostrich had been seized by police,
and found to be containing tools which could have been used by demonstrators to
chain themselves to fences.". More coverage from the Climate Camp can be found
on UK Indymedia. Defend the NHS! In September 2006 the Mischief Makers started
to support the work of unions and other group opposing the cuts and
privatisation of the UK's National Health Service (NHS). To add a creative
element to the trade unions work, a giant syringe was built which took part in
a "2000 people strong demonstration" through the City of Nottingham on 23
September.
