The Communist Manifesto The Communist Manifesto ("Das Kommunistische
Manifest"), originally titled Manifesto of the Communist Party () is a short
1848 publication written by the political theorists Karl Marx and Friedrich
Engels. It has since been recognized as one of the world's most influential
political manuscripts. Commissioned by the Communist League, it laid out the
League's purposes and program. It presents an analytical approach to the class
struggle (historical and present) and the problems of capitalism, rather than a
prediction of communism's potential future forms. The book contains Marx and
Engels' theories about the nature of society and politics, that in their own
words, "The history of all hitherto existing society is the history of class
struggles". It also briefly features their ideas for how the capitalist society
of the time would eventually be replaced by socialism, and then eventually
communism. Authorship. Friedrich Engels has often been credited in composing
the first drafts, which led to "The Communist Manifesto". In July 1847, Engels
was elected into the Communist League, where he was assigned to draw up a
catechism. This became the "Draft of a Communist Confession of Faith." The
draft contained almost two dozen questions that helped express the ideas of
both Engels and Karl Marx at the time. In October 1847, Engels composed his
second draft for the Communist League entitled "The Principles of Communism."
The text remained unpublished until 1914, despite its basis for "The
Manifesto." From Engels's drafts Marx was able to write, once commissioned by
the Communist League, "The Communist Manifesto," where he combined more of his
ideas along with Engels's drafts and work, "The Condition of the Working Class
in England." Although the names of both Engels and Karl Marx appear on the
title page alongside the "persistent assumption of joint-authorship", Engels,
in the preface introduction to the 1883 German edition of the Manifesto, said
that the "Manifesto" was "essentially Marx's work" and that "the basic
thought... belongs solely and exclusively to Marx." Engels wrote after Marx's
death, Despite Engels's modesty in these two quotations, in fact he made major
contributions to the Manifesto, starting with the suggestion to abandon "the
form of a catechism and entitle it the Communist "Manifesto"." Moreover, Engels
joined Marx in Brussels for the writing of the Manifesto. There is no evidence
of what his contributions to the final writing were, but the Manifesto bears
the stamp of Marx's more rhetorical writing style. Nevertheless, it seems clear
that Engels's contributions justify his name's appearance on the title page
after Marx's. Textual history. "The Communist Manifesto" was first published
(in German) in London by a group of German political refugees in 1848. It was
also serialised at around the same time in a German-language London newspaper,
the "Deutsche Londoner Zeitung". The first English translation was produced by
Helen Macfarlane in 1850, and the book was first published in the United States
by Stephen Pearl Andrews. The "Manifesto" went through a number of editions
from 1872 to 1890; notable new prefaces were written by Marx and Engels for the
1872 German edition, the 1882 Russian edition, the 1883 French edition, and the
1888 English edition. The , translated by Samuel Moore with the assistance of
Engels, has been the most commonly used English text since. However, some
recent English editions, such as Phil Gasper's annotated "road map" (Haymarket
Books, 2006), have used a slightly modified text in response to criticisms of
the Moore translation made by Hal Draper in his 1994 history of the
"Manifesto", "The Adventures of the "Communist Manifesto"" (Center for
Socialist History, 1994). In late 2010, Red Quill Books announced the release
of a modern, illustrated "comic book" version of the Communist Manifesto in
four parts. Contents. The "Manifesto" is divided into an introduction, three
substantive sections, and a conclusion. Introduction. The preamble to the main
text of the Manifesto states that the continent of Europe fears the "spectre of
communism", and the powers of old Europe are uniting in "a holy alliance to
exorcise this spectre". Marx refers here to not only the houses of power and
landed gentry of old Europe—the bourgeoisie—but diverse factions such as
the papacy and the emerging corporate world as well. Marx declares that "It is
high time that Communists should openly, in the face of the whole world,
publish their views, their aims, their tendencies, and meet this nursery tale
of the spectre of communism with a manifesto of the party itself". I. Bourgeois
and Proletarians. The first chapter of the "Manifesto", "Bourgeois and
Proletarians", examines the Marxist conception of history, with the initial
idea asserting that "The history of all hitherto existing society is the
history of class struggles". It goes on to say that in capitalism, the working
class, proletariat, are fighting in the class struggle against the owners of
the means of production, the bourgeois, and that past class struggle ended
either with revolution that restructured society, or "common ruin of the
contending classes". It continues by adding that the bourgeois exploits the
proletariat through the "constant revolutionising of production uninterrupted
disturbance of all social conditions". The Manifesto explains that the reason
the bourgeois exist and exploit the proletariat with low wages is private
property, "the accumulation of wealth in private hands, the formation and
increase of capital", and that competition amongst the proletariat creates
wage-labour, which rests entirely on the competition among the workers. This
section further explains that the proletarians will eventually rise to power
through class struggle: the bourgeoisie constantly exploits the proletariat for
its manual labour and cheap wages, ultimately to create profit for the
bourgeois; the proletariat rise to power through revolution against the
bourgeoisie such as riots or creation of unions. The Communist Manifesto states
that while there is still class struggle amongst society, capitalism will be
overthrown by the proletariat only to start again in the near future;
ultimately communism is the key to class equality amongst the citizens of
Europe. II. Proletarians and Communists. The second section, "Proletarians and
Communists", starts by stating the relationship of conscious communists to the
rest of the working class, declaring that they will not form a separate party
that opposes other working-class parties, will express the interests and
general will of the proletariat as a whole, and will distinguish themselves
from other working-class parties by always expressing the common interest of
the entire proletariat independently of all nationalities and representing the
interests of the movement as a whole. The implementation of these policies
would, as believed by Marx and Engels, be a precursor to the stateless and
classless society. In a controversial passage they suggested that the
"proletariat" might in competition with the bourgeoisie be compelled to
organise as a class, form a revolution, make itself a ruling class, sweep away
the old conditions of production, and in that step have abolished its own
supremacy as a class. This account of the transition from socialism to
communism was criticised particularly during and after the Soviet era. III.
Socialist and Communist Literature. The third section, "Socialist and Communist
Literature," distinguishes communism from other socialist doctrines prevalent
at the time the "Manifesto" was written. While the degree of reproach of Marx
and Engels toward rival perspectives varies, all are dismissed for advocating
reformism and failing to recognise the preeminent role of the working class.
IV. Position of the Communists in Relation to the Various Opposition Parties.
The concluding section, "Position of the Communists in Relation to the Various
Opposition Parties", briefly discusses the communist position on struggles in
specific countries in the mid-nineteenth century such as France, Switzerland,
Poland, and Germany, and declares that Germany "is on the eve of a bourgeois
revolution", and predicts that a world revolution will soon follow. It then
ends by declaring an alliance with the social democrats, boldly supporting
other communist revolutions, and calling the proletarians to action, ending
with the rallying cry of communism, "Workers of the world, unite!". Reception.
The revolutionary wave throughout Europe in 1848, which began in France in
February and immediately spread to most of Europe and parts of Latin America,
owed nothing to "The Communist Manifesto", but within a year the revolutions
collapsed. Subsequently, traditional authorities found in "The Communist
Manifesto" and its contents a good excuse for action against its authors. As a
consequence, Marx and his wife were arrested and expelled from Belgium, the
German daily newspaper published by Marx in Cologne between 1 June 1848 and 19
May 1849, "Neue Rheinische Zeitung: Organ der Demokratie", was suppressed, and
Marx himself was expelled from Germany and France, and, in August 1849 he
sought refuge in London. The continued relevance of the Marxist theories found
within the text has also been supported by the Marxist academic Alex
Callinicos, editor of "International Socialism", who stated that "This is
indeed a manifesto for the 21st century." Writing in "The London Evening
Standard" on 23 April, Andrew Neather cited Verso Books' 2012 re-edition of
"The Communist Manifesto", with an introduction by Eric Hobsbawm, as part of a
resurgence of left-wing-themed ideas which includes the publication of Owen
Jones' best-selling "Chavs: The Demonization of the Working Class", and Jason
Barker's documentary "Marx Reloaded".
