The Mountain The Mountain (French: "La Montagne") refers in the context of the
history of the French Revolution to a political group, whose members, called
Montagnards, sat on the highest benches in the Assembly. The term, which was
first used during the session of the Legislative Assembly, did not come into
general use until 1793. At the opening of the National Convention the
"Montagnard" group comprised men of very diverse shades of opinion, and such
cohesion as it subsequently acquired was due rather to the opposition of its
leaders to the Girondist leaders than to any fundamental agreement in
philosophy among the Montagnards' own leaders. The chief point of distinction
was that the Girondists were mainly theorists and thinkers, whereas the
Mountain consisted almost entirely of uncompromising men of action.
Additionally, Montagnards tended to be more vocal in defence of the lower
classes and employed a more moralistic rhetoric than the Girondins. During
their struggle with the Girondists, the Montagnards gained the upper hand in
the Jacobin Club, and for a time "Jacobin" and "Montagnard" were synonymous
terms. The Mountain was successively under the sway of such men as Marat,
Danton, and Robespierre. Dominating the Convention and the Committee of Public
Safety, they imposed a policy of terror. The Mountain was then split into
several distinct factions, those who favored an alliance with the people, and
social measures – led by Georges-Jacques Danton – and the proponents of The
Terror – led by Maximilien Robespierre. In addition, several members were
close to the mountain of the Enragés led by Jacques Roux, or Hebertism led by
Jacques René Hébert. The group was to become one of the prime movers in the
eventual downfall of Robespierre in the events of 9 Thermidor. The group
dissolved shortly after Robespierre's death (28 July 1794). After the February
Revolution of 1848, the Mountain was reconstituted as the left wing faction in
the Constituent Assembly elected that year (see: The Mountain (1849)), and in
the Legislative Assembly which followed the next year.
