The Ragged-Trousered Philanthropists The Ragged-Trousered Philanthropists is a
novel by Robert Tressell first published in 1914 after his death in 1911. An
explicitly political work, it is widely regarded as a classic of working-class
literature. Background. Robert Tressell was the nom-de-plume of Robert Noonan,
a house painter. Although born in Dublin (and baptised with the surname
Croker), Noonan settled in England after living in South Africa at the
beginning of the twentieth century. He chose the pen name Tressell in reference
to the trestle table, an important part of his kit as a painter and decorator.
Based on his own experiences of poverty, exploitation, and his terror that he
and his daughter Kathleen — whom he was raising alone — would be consigned
to the workhouse if he became ill, Noonan embarked on a detailed and scathing
Marxist analysis of the relationship between working-class people and their
employers. The "philanthropists" of the title are the workers who, in Noonan 's
view, acquiesce in their own exploitation in the interests of their bosses. The
novel is set in the fictional town of Mugsborough, based on the southern
English coastal town of Hastings, where Noonan lived, although its geographical
location is described in the book and is well away from the actual town of
Hastings. The original title page of the book carried the subtitle: "Being the
story of twelve months in Hell, told by one of the damned, and written down by
Robert Tressell." He completed "The Ragged-Trousered Philanthropists" in 1910,
but the 1,600-page hand-written manuscript was rejected by the three publishing
houses to which it was submitted. The rejections severely depressed Noonan, and
Kathleen had to save the manuscript from being burnt. She placed it for
safekeeping in a metal box underneath her bed. After Noonan died of
tuberculosis, Kathleen was determined to have her father's writing published
and showed it to a friend, the writer Jessie Pope. Pope recommended the book to
her own publisher, who bought the rights in April 1914 for £25. It was
published that year in much abridged form in the United Kingdom and in an even
more abridged form (90,000 words, from the original 250,000), in 1918. It was
also published in Canada and the United States in 1914, in the Soviet Union in
1920, and in Germany in 1925. The publisher removed much of the socialist
ideology from the first edition; an unabridged edition with Noonan's original
ending was not published until 1955. Plot introduction. Clearly frustrated at
the refusal of his contemporaries to recognise the inequity and iniquity of
society, Tressell's cast of hypocritical Christians, exploitative capitalists
and corrupt councillors provide a backdrop for his main target — the workers
who think that a better life is "not for the likes of them". Hence the title of
the book; Tressell paints the workers as "philanthropists" who throw themselves
into back-breaking work for poverty wages in order to generate profit for their
masters. The hero of the book, Frank Owen, is a socialist who believes that the
capitalist system is the real source of the poverty he sees all around him. In
vain he tries to convince his fellow workers of his world view, but finds that
their education has trained them to distrust their own thoughts and to rely on
those of their "betters". Much of the book consists of conversations between
Owen and the others, or more often of lectures by Owen in the face of their
jeering; this was presumably based on Tressell's own experiences. Major themes.
The book provides a comprehensive picture of social, political, economic and
cultural life in Britain at a time when socialism was beginning to gain ground.
It was around that time that the Labour Party was founded and began to win
seats in the House of Commons. The book advocates a socialist society in which
work is performed to satisfy the needs of all rather than to generate profit
for a few. A key chapter is "The Great Money Trick", in which Owen organises a
mock-up of capitalism with his workmates, using slices of bread as raw
materials and knives as machinery. Owen 'employs' his workmates cutting up the
bread to illustrate that the employer — who does not work — generates
personal wealth whilst the workers effectively remain no better off than when
they began, endlessly swapping coins back and forth for food and wages. This is
Tressell's practical way of illustrating the Marxist theory of surplus value,
which in the capitalist system is generated by labour.
