People With AIDS The People With AIDS (PWA) Self-Empowerment Movement is a
social movement by those diagnosed with HIV/AIDS which grew out of San
Francisco in the early 1980s. The PWA Self-Empowerment Movement believes that
those diagnosed as having AIDS should "take charge of their own life, illness,
and care, and to minimize dependence on others". The attitude that exists
throughout the movement is that one should not assume that their life is over
and will end soon solely because they have been diagnosed with HIV/AIDS.
Although most of the earliest organizers have died, and organizations dissolved
or reconfigured into AIDS service organizations (ASOs) the self-empowerment and
self-determination aspects of the movement continue. Possibly the best known
example of a continuing PWA group is AIDS Coalition To Unleash Power (ACT-UP),
which has chapters around the world and has had great success bringing
attention to and change regarding issues concerning PWAs. "PWA" is also used
simply to mean "person with HIV/AIDS", regardless of whether that person is
associated with the PWA Self-Empowerment Movement. History. Bobbi Campbell was
a gay San Francisco man who was diagnosed with AIDS in September 1981, making
him one of the first people to be diagnosed with the AIDS. On the
recommendation of Marcus Conant, a doctor specializing in AIDS care, Bobbi
began meeting with another man diagnosed with HIV, Dan Turner. The two met at
Turner’s house in the Castro. There, they laid the groundwork for what was to
become known as People with AIDS San Francisco. After that, Turner was invited
to speak at the birthday party of the late Harvey Milk, the openly gay city
supervisor of San Francisco who had been assassinated in 1978. On Castro
street, Turner, as well as Campbell, identified themselves publicly as having
AIDS. Turner’s speech urged people to do three things: keep informed, be
cautious but not paranoid, and be supportive. This was the first of many
speaking events for Campbell and Turner. Shortly afterwards, a meeting was held
to form the KS/AIDS Foundation, which later became the San Francisco AIDS
Foundation. In May 1983, the first AIDS candlelight march led and organized by
people with AIDS was held. The stated goal of the march was to draw attention
to the plight of those with AIDS and to remember those who had died. The march
was led by a banner with the slogan "Fighting For Our Lives", which became the
motto of the movement. Later that month, on 23 May 1983, People With AIDS San
Francisco voted to send Campbell and Turner to the National Lesbian and Gay
Health Conference, at which the Second National AIDS Forum would be held. New
York activists. On the East Coast, New York City served as another hotbed for
the movement. One of the first People With AIDS groups in the east was formed
by Michael Callen and Richard Berkowitz. Callen and Berkowitz met through their
doctor, Joseph Sonnabend, in 1982. Initially, Callen and Berkowitz attended a
peer support group for people with AIDS at Beth Israel Hospital, as well as
meetings of Gay Men's Health Crisis. After some time, however, the two grew
frustrated with the meetings, and left to form Gay Men With AIDS. In the same
year, they wrote an article for the "New York Native" titled “We Know Who We
Are: Two Gay Men Declare War on Promiscuity”. In it, they put forth that AIDS
was the result of not a single virus, but a cumulative overload of the immune
system from sexual promiscuity and abuses of the body. Their hypothesis on the
cause of AIDS has since been dismissed. In mid-to-late 1982, Callen and several
other people with AIDS became aware of the New York AIDS Network, which met
every Tuesday morning at the East Village offices of the Community Health
Project. The New York AIDS Network was founded by Hal Kooden, Virginia Apuzzo
and a doctor, Roger Enlow, as an open political forum for the sharing of
information related to AIDS. As those in New York grew frustrated from
listening to doctors, nurses, lawyers, insurance experts and social workers
talk about AIDS, they realized they were hearing very little from the "real"
experts. The decision was made to attend the Second National AIDS Forum at the
National Lesbian and Gay Health Conference, which was sponsored by the Lesbian
and Gay Health Education Foundation. By this point, some of the activists in
New York learned of Bobbi Campbell and others in San Francisco. They learned
that Campbell and others would be in attendance, and had been calling on
organizations that provided AIDS services to sponsor gay men in order so that
they may attend the conference. Alan Long, another person with AIDS, sponsored
three of the New York activists to attend the conference in Denver. The Denver
conference. At the conference, which had the theme “Health Pioneering in the
Eighties”, people with AIDS from around the country met, gathering in a
hospitality suite organized by Helen Shietinger, R.N. and Dan Bailey, who
coordinated the event. Although an incomplete list, below are some of those who
were in that room. Debate. Bobbi Campbell took charge of the discussion. He
believed in a political network of persons with AIDS groups in every major
city. It was believed that these groups would then form a National Association
of People With AIDS. There was very little friction between those in
attendance, with only small arguments such as the terms patients and victims
versus people with AIDS, the latter of which was agreed on as being the label
of choice. This discussion led to the drafting of The Denver Principles. The
Denver Principles. The drafters of The Denver Principles stormed the closing of
the conference in order to present their work. At the presentation, the San
Francisco activists had brought the “Fighting For Our Lives” banner. The
presentation brought the crowd to tears, and it was a full ten minutes until
the audience was able to compose itself. The keynote speaker, Ginny Apuzzo, in
response to the presentation, opened with, “if those health care providers in
attendance were the health care pioneers, then those of us with AIDS were truly
the trailblazers”. After the Denver Conference. After the Denver Conference,
four of the activists (Bobbi Campbell, Richard Berkowitz, Artie Felson, and
Mike Campbell) began to plan for the National Association of People with AIDS
while on the smoking section of the plane. Afterwards, the first of the
political organizations planned was formed, called simply PWA-New York. While
PWA-New York initially was met with resistance by the Gay Men’s Health
Center, the two organizations learned to coexist. PWA-New York is noted for
designing the first safer sex poster to appear in New York bathhouses. Across
the country, PWA organizations became active. In Denver, local PWA members took
part in parades and lobbied in the legislature (In general, putting a human
face on the disease). In San Francisco, posters similar to those in New York
were distributed. In June 1984, the annual Gay Freedom Day Parade in San
Francisco was dedicated to people with AIDS. People With AIDS marched near the
front of the parade, with Bobbi Campbell and the “Fighting For Our Lives”
banner. PWA Coalitions and National Organizations. By the mid-eighties, PWA-New
York faced challenges. A negative environment, combined with the deaths of many
founders, led to the group being disbanded. However, the New York activists
were quick to rebound, forming the PWA Coalition. PWA Coalitions continue to
exist today throughout the country. In 1987, the National Association of People
With AIDS was incorporated as a 501(c)3 not–for–profit corporation to be
the national voice of people with AIDS. Today, it is the oldest national AIDS
organization in the United States and the oldest national network of people
living with HIV/AIDS in the world. The Denver Principles Project. In 2009, the
National Association of People with AIDS (NAPWA) and "POZ" magazine announced a
new initiative called The Denver Principles Project. The Denver Principles
Project will recommit the HIV community to the Denver Principles and
dramatically increase NAPWA's membership. With a vastly increased membership,
NAPWA will be better able to advocate for effective HIV prevention and care, as
well as to combat the stigma that surrounds HIV and impedes education,
prevention and treatment of HIV.
