The Internationale "The Internationale" ("L'Internationale" in French) is a
widely sung left-wing anthem. It has been one of the most recognizable and
popular songs of the socialist movement since the late 19th century, when the
Second International (now the Socialist International) adopted it as its
official anthem. The original French refrain of the song is "C'est la lutte
finale / Groupons-nous et demain / L'Internationale / Sera le genre humain."
(English: "This is the final struggle / Let us group together and tomorrow /
The Internationale / Will be the human race.") "The Internationale" has been
translated into many languages. It is often sung with the left hand raised in a
clenched fist salute and is sometimes followed (in English-speaking places)
with a chant of "The workers united will never be defeated". "The
Internationale" has been celebrated by socialists, communists, and anarchists.
Original lyrics and copyright. The original French words were written in June
1871 by Eugène Pottier (1816–1887, previously a member of the Paris Commune)
and were originally intended to be sung to the tune of "La Marseillaise".
Pierre De Geyter (1848–1932) set the poem to music in 1888. His melody was
first publicly performed in July 1888 and became widely used soon after. In an
unsuccessful attempt to save Pierre De Geyter's job as a woodcarver, the 6,000
leaflets printed by Lille printer Bolboduc only mentioned the French version of
his family name (Degeyter). In 1904, Pierre's brother Adolphe was induced by
the Lille mayor Gustave Delory to claim copyright, so that the income of the
song would continue to go to Delory's French Socialist Party. Pierre De Geyter
lost the first copyright case in 1914, but after his brother committed suicide
and left a note explaining the fraud, Pierre was declared the copyright owner
by a court of appeal in 1922. Pierre De Geyter died in 1932. His music of the
"Internationale" is copyrighted in France until . The duration of copyright in
France is 70 years following the end of the year when the author died, plus
(for musical works) 6 years and 152 days to compensate for World War I, and 8
years and 120 days to compensate for World War II respectively. In 2005, Le
Chant du Monde, the corporation administering the authors' rights, asked Pierre
Merejkowsky, the film director and an actor of "Insurrection / résurrection",
to pay €1,000 for whistling the song for seven seconds. However, as the
"Internationale" music was published before 1 July 1909 outside the United
States of America, it is in the public domain in the United States. Pierre De
Geyter's music is also in the public domain in countries and areas whose
copyright durations are authors' lifetime plus 75 years or less. As Eugène
Pottier died in 1887, his original French lyrics are in the public domain.
Gustave Delory once acquired the copyright of his lyrics through the songwriter
G B Clement having bought it from Pottier's widow. Translations into other
languages. The German version, Die Internationale (translation by Emil
Luckhardt 1910) was adopted by the protesters on the streets of East Berlin in
1953 and again in October 1989, when East Germans taken prisoner by their own
police following demonstrations in the wake of Mikhail Gorbachev's visit sang
the hymn to embarrass their captors by suggesting they had abandoned the
socialist cause they were supposed to serve. Luckhardt's version of the final
line of the chorus tellingly reads: "Die Internationale erkämpft das
Menschenrecht". (The Internationale will win our human rights.) It was coupled
with the chant: "Volkspolizei, steh dem Volke bei" (People's police, stand with
the people!). The Internationale in Chinese (), literally the "International
Song", has several different sets of lyrics. One such version served as the "de
facto" anthem of the Communist Party of China, the national anthem of the
Chinese Soviet Republic, as well as a rallying song of the students and workers
at the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989. Versions of the song in Indian
languages, particularly Bengali and Malayalam, have existed since the 1950s
since the translation of the song for the people of the Indian state of Kerala
by actor and social activist Premji for the united Communist Party of India
(CPI). In the 1980s, more translations appeared. Translations by Sachidanandan
and Mokeri Ramachandran were sung by the activists of Janakeeya Samskarikavedi,
an organisation connected with CPI(Marxist-Leninist) (CPI(ML). Translation by
N. P. Chandrasekharan was for Students Federation of India (SFI), the student
organisation associated with CPI(Marxist) (CPI(M) and published in the Student
Monthly, the organ of SFI. English Lyrics. The traditional British version of
The Internationale is usually sung in three verses, while the American version,
authored by Charles Hope Kerr with five verses, is usually sung in two. The
American version is sometimes sung with the phrase "the internationale", "the
international soviet", or "the international union" in place of "the
international working class". In English renditions, "Internationale" is
sometimes sung as rather than the French pronunciation of . The English
versions are known to be notoriously difficult to sing, as the lyrics may
appear sometimes forced and unnatural. British musician Billy Bragg, after
talking to the American folk singer and activist Pete Seeger, agreed that the
old lyrics were "archaic and unsingable". Bragg composed revised verses for the
song, based on the British version. The recording was released on his album
"The Internationale" along with reworkings of other socialist songs. A full,
six-stanza translation can be found on the Wikisource page on The
Internationale.
