The Legislative Assembly and the fall of the French monarchy The French
Revolution was a period in the history of France covering the years 1789 to
1799, in which republicans overthrew the Bourbon monarchy and the Roman
Catholic Church perforce underwent radical restructuring. This article covers
the one-year period from 1 October 1791 to September 1792, during which France
was governed by the Legislative Assembly, operating under the French
Constitution of 1791, between the periods of the National Constituent Assembly
and of the National Convention. The composition of the Legislative Assembly.
The National Constituent Assembly dissolved itself on October 1, 1791. Upon
Robespierre's motion it had decreed that none of its members should be capable
of sitting in the next legislature, this is known as the Self-Denying
Ordinance. Its legacy, the Constitution of 1791, attempted to institute a
liberal constitutional monarchy. This had been envisioned as an arrangement not
to be tampered with for a generation but, in the event, it did not last a year.
In the attempt to govern, the Assembly failed altogether. In the words of the
1911 "Encyclopædia Britannica", "It left behind an empty treasury, an
undisciplined army and navy, and a people debauched by safe and successful
riot." In the elections of 1791, despite a limited electoral franchise, the
party which desired to carry the Revolution further had a success
disproportionate to its numbers, a triumph for the Jacobin Club and by its
affiliated societies throughout France. The Legislative Assembly first met on 1
October 1791. It consisted of 745 members. Few were nobles, very few were
clergymen, and the great body came from the middle class. The members were
generally young, and, since none had sat in the previous Assembly, they largely
lacked national political experience. The Right consisted of about 165
"Feuillants". Among them were some able men, such as Mathieu Dumas, Ramond,
Vaublanc, Beugnot and Bigot de Préamenau, but they were guided chiefly by
persons outside the House, because incapable of re-election: Barnave, Adrien
Duport, and the brothers Alexander and Charles Lameth. The Left consisted of
about 330 Jacobins, a term which still included the now-emergent party
afterwards known as the Girondins or Girondists – so termed because several
of their leaders came from the region of the Gironde in southern France. Among
the extreme Left—those who would retain the name of Jacobins—sat Cambon,
Couthon, Antoine-Christophe Merlin ("Merlin de Thionville"), François Chabot,
and Claude Bazire. The Girondins could claim the most brilliant orators: Pierre
Victurnien Vergniaud, Marguerite-Élie Guadet, Armand Gensonné, and Maximin
Isnard (the last being from Provence). Jacques Pierre Brissot ("Brissot de
Warville"), a restless pamphleteer and editor of the newspaper "Patriote", was
described by the 1911 "Encyclopædia Britannica" as "inferior to these men in
talent", but exerted such great influence over the party that it has sometimes
gone by his name ("Brissotins"). Also aligned with the Girondins were
Condorcet, secretary of the Assembly and Pétion, barred from the Legislative
Assembly because he had been in the Constitutional Assembly, but who soon
became mayor of Paris. This strong representation of the left in the Assembly
was supplemented by the political clubs and the disorderly revolutionary
elements in Paris and throughout France. The remainder of the Assembly, about
350 deputies (Matthews 2004), did not belong to any definite party, but voted
most often with the Left. The king's ministers. The king's ministers, named by
him and excluded from the Assembly, were mostly persons of little mark.
Montmorin gave up the portfolio of foreign affairs on 31 October 1791 and was
succeeded by De Lessart, the previous minister of finance. Bon-Claude Cahier de
Gerville was minister of the interior; Louis Hardouin Tarbé, minister of
finance; and Bertrand de Molleville, minister of marine. But the only minister
who influenced the course of affairs was the comte de Narbonne, minister of
war. Overtly, the king (despite his earlier attempt to escape Paris during the
flight to Varennes) had embraced the newly codified constitution. It seems
unlikely that he could actually have liked losing his previous absolute power,
but he may well have been sincerely trying to make the best of what, from his
point of view, was a bad situation. Marie Antoinette surely wished to shake off
the impotence and humiliation of the Crown, and for this end she still clung to
the hope of foreign succour and corresponded with Vienna. The politics of the
Left. The Left had three objects of enmity. First among these was the royal
couple, King Louis XVI, Queen Marie Antoinette and the royal family. The Left
as a whole wished to replace the monarchy with a republic, although this was
not initially the public position of most of them. Second came the "émigrés"
– now seen as a threat from abroad—and, third, the non-juring clergy. Those
"émigrés" who had assembled in arms on the territories of the electors of
Mainz and Treves (Trier) and in the Austrian Netherlands had put themselves in
the position of public enemies. Their chiefs were the king's brothers, who
affected to consider Louis as a captive and his acts as therefore invalid. The
count of Provence gave himself the airs of a regent and surrounded himself with
a ministry. The 1911 "Encyclopædia Britannica" writes that the only actual
danger posed by the "émigrés" was symbolic: that they were only a few
thousand strong; that they had no competent leader and no money; and that
although they had earlier been of some diplomatic significance, they were
increasingly unwelcome to the rulers whose hospitality they abused. However,
Mignet claims that the threat was more substantive and their numbers growing
and that "the ambassadors of the emigrants were received, while those of the
French government were dismissed, ill received, or even thrown into prison, as
in the case of M. Duveryer." The non-juring clergy – those who refused to
take an oath under the Civil Constitution of the Clergy – although harassed
by the local authorities, kept the respect and confidence of most Catholics.
The 1911 "Encyclopædia Britannica" reports that "No acts of disloyalty were
proved against them, and commissioners of the National Assembly reported to its
successor that their flocks only desired to be let alone. But the anti-clerical
bias of the Legislative Assembly was too strong for such a policy." Mignet,
however, quotes the marquis de Ferrières, "Priests, and especially bishops
employed all the resources of fanaticism to excite the people, in town and
country, against the civil constitution of the clergy", and points out that
Bishops ordered the priests no longer to perform divine service in the same
church with the constitutional priests. It was increasingly unlikely that two
rival Churches could co-exist. Insurrection along religious lines broke out in
Calvados, Gévaudan, and the Vendée ("see Revolt in the Vendée)". The king
exercises his veto. From the first, relations between the king and the
Legislative Assembly were less than friendly. The king refused to meet the
Assembly's initial delegation in person; the Assembly voted to deprive the
ceremony of the king's visit to their hall of almost all customary pomp
(although the vote was rescinded the following day, and the king's address was
generally well received). On 9 November 1791 the Assembly decreed that the
"émigrés" assembled on the frontiers should be liable to the penalties of
death and confiscation if they remained so assembled on 1 January following.
(The legislation was clearly directed against those who had taken up arms or
engaged in diplomacy: it was reasonably indulgent towards those who simply felt
safer abroad.) Louis did not love his brothers, and he detested their policy,
which without rendering him any service made his liberty and even his life
precarious; yet, loath to condemn them to death, he vetoed the decree. He did,
however, sign a decree of 30 October, stating that his eldest brother Louis-
Stanislaus-Xavier was required to return to France in two months, or at the
expiration of that period he would be considered to have forfeited his rights
as regent. On 29 November 1791 the Assembly decreed that every non-juring
clergyman must take within eight days the civic oath, substantially the same as
the oath previously administered, on pain of losing his pension and, if any
troubles broke out, of being deported. This decree Louis vetoed as a matter of
conscience. In either case his resistance only served to give a weapon to his
enemies in the Assembly. But foreign affairs were at this time the most
critical. A new administration in Paris. Following the same policy under which
the members of the Constituent Assembly had barred themselves from the
Legislative Assembly, in October, Lafayette resigned the command of the
National Guard, and Bailly retired from the mayoralty of Paris. Most of those
who wished to continue a constitutional monarchy (against the increasingly
republican legislature) wished Lafayette to succeed Bailly as mayor. However,
afraid of Lafayette as a rival to the king, the court actually favored and
assisted the Girondist Pétion in the election. In the election of 4 November,
Pétion received 9,708 votes in a total of 10,632 and became the new mayor. War
approaches. The armed bodies of "émigrés" on the territory of the Holy Roman
Empire afforded matter of complaint to France. The persistence of the French in
offering only money as compensation to the German princes who had claims in
Alsace afforded matter of complaint to the Empire. Foreign noticed with alarm
the effect of the French Revolution upon opinion in their own countries, and
they resented the endeavours of French revolutionaries to make converts there.
Of these statesmen, the emperor Leopold II was the most intelligent. He had
skillfully extricated himself from the embarrassments at home and abroad left
by his predecessor Joseph II. He had family ties to Louis XVI, and he was
obliged, as chief of the Holy Roman Empire, to protect the border princes. On
the other hand, he understood the weakness of the Habsburg monarchy. He knew
that the Austrian Netherlands, where he had with difficulty restored his
authority, were full of friends of the Revolution and that a French army would
be welcomed by many Belgians. He despised the weakness and the folly of the
"émigrés" and excluded them from his councils. He earnestly desired to avoid
a war which might endanger his sister Marie Antoinette or her husband. In
August 1791 Leopold had met Frederick William II of Prussia at Pillnitz Castle
near Dresden, and the two monarchs had joined in stating in the Declaration of
Pillnitz that they considered the restoration of order and of monarchy in
France an object of interest to all sovereigns. They further declared that they
would be ready to act for this purpose in concert with the other powers. The
1911 "Encyclopædia Britannica" argues that this declaration appears to have
been drawn from Leopold by pressure of circumstances. He well knew that
concerted action of the powers was impossible, as Great Britain had firmly
resolved not to meddle with French affairs. After Louis had accepted the
constitution, Leopold virtually withdrew his declaration. Nevertheless it
remained a grave error of judgment and contributed to the approaching war. In
France many persons desired war for various reasons. Narbonne trusted to find
in it the means of restoring a certain authority to the crown and of limiting
the Revolution. He contemplated a war with Austria only. The Girondins desired
war in the hope that it would enable them to abolish monarchy altogether. They
desired a general war because they believed that it would carry the Revolution
into other countries and make it secure in France by making it universal. The
extreme Left had the same objects, but it held that a war for those objects
could not safely be entrusted to the king and his ministers. Victory would
revive the power of the crown; defeat would be the undoing of the Revolution.
Robespierre also argued against the Girondins' objective of using war as a
means of exporting revolution, on the grounds that "nobody likes armed
missionaries". Hence Robespierre and those who thought with him desired peace.
The French nation generally had never approved of the Austrian alliance, and
regarded the Habsburgs as traditional enemies. The views of the king and queen
on the matter continue to be a matter of controversy. Some historians argue
that they dreaded a war with Austria; others that they wanted war because they
thought France would lose and the Austrians and the other invaders would then
restore the absolute monarchy. France was in no condition to wage a serious
war. The constitution was unworkable and the governing authorities were
mutually hostile. The finances remained in disorder, with inflation rampant:
"assignats" of the face value of 900,000,000 "livres" were issued by the
Legislative Assembly in less than a year. The army had been thinned by
desertion and was enervated by long ill-discipline. The fortresses were in bad
condition and short of supplies. In October Leopold ordered the dispersion of
the "émigrés" who had mustered in arms in the Austrian Netherlands. His
example was followed by the electors of Treves and Mainz. At the same time they
implored the emperor's protection, and the Austrian chancellor Wenzel Anton von
Kaunitz informed Noailles, the French ambassador that this protection would be
given if necessary. Narbonne demanded a credit of 20,000,000 livres, which the
Assembly granted. He made a tour of inspection in the north of France and
reported untruly to the Assembly that all was in readiness for war. On 14
January 1792 the diplomatic committee reported to the Assembly that the emperor
should be required to give satisfactory assurances before 10 February. The
Assembly put off the term to 1 March. In February Leopold concluded a defensive
treaty with Frederick William II. But there was no mutual confidence between
the sovereigns, who were at that very time pursuing opposite policies with
regard to Poland. Leopold still hesitated and still hoped to avoid war. He died
on 1 March 1792, and the imperial dignity became vacant. The hereditary
dominions of Austria passed to his son Francis, afterwards the emperor Francis
II, a youth of small abilities and no experience. The real conduct of affairs
fell, therefore, to the aged Kaunitz. In France Narbonne failed to carry the
king or his colleagues along with him. The king took courage to dismiss him on
9 March 1792, whereupon the Legislative Assembly testified its confidence in
Narbonne. De Lessart having incurred its anger by the tameness of his replies
to Austrian dictation, the Assembly voted his impeachment. The Girondin
ministry. The king, seeing no other course open, formed a new ministry which
was chiefly Girondin. Jean-Marie Roland became minister of the interior,
Étienne Clavière of finance, Pierre Marie de Grave of war, and Jean de
Lacoste of marine. Far abler and more resolute than any of these men was
Charles François Dumouriez, the new minister for foreign affairs. A soldier by
profession, he had been employed in the secret diplomacy of Louis XV and had
thus gained a wide knowledge of international politics. He stood aloof from
parties and had no rigid principles, but held views closely resembling those of
Narbonne. He wished for a war with Austria which should restore some influence
to the crown and make himself the arbiter of France. It is difficult today to
imagine how different these men were from the previous ministers. According to
Mignet, the court named this ministry ""le Ministère Sans-Culotte"", and the
first time Roland appeared at court—with laces rather than buckles on his
shoes—the master of the ceremonies initially refused to admit him. The king
bent to necessity, and on 20 April 1792 came to the Assembly with the proposal
that war should be declared against Austria. It was carried by acclamation.
Dumouriez intended to begin with an invasion of the Austrian Netherlands. As
this would awaken English jealousy, he sent Talleyrand to London with
assurances that, if victorious, the French would annex no territory. The
initial disasters of war. The French war plan envisaged invading the
Netherlands at three points simultaneously. Lafayette would march against
Namur, Biron against Mons, and Dillon against Tournai. But the first movement
disclosed the miserable state of the army. Smitten with panic, Dillon's force
fled at sight of the enemy, and Dillon, after receiving a wound from one of his
own soldiers, was murdered by the mob of Lille. Biron was easily routed before
Mons. On hearing of these disasters Lafayette found it necessary to retreat.
This shameful discomfiture quickened all the suspicion and jealousy fermenting
in France. De Grave had to resign and was succeeded by Servan. The Austrian
forces in the Netherlands were, however, so weak that they could not take the
offensive. Austria demanded help from Prussia under the terms of their recent
alliance, and the claim was admitted. Prussia declared war against France, and
the Duke of Brunswick was chosen to command the allied forces, but various
causes delayed action. Austrian and Prussian interests clashed in Poland. The
Austrian government wished to preserve a harmless neighbour. The Prussian
government desired another Polish partition and a large tract of Polish
territory. Only after long discussion was it agreed that Prussia should be free
to act in Poland, while Austria might find compensation in provinces conquered
from France. The respite thus given allowed France to improve the army.
Meantime the Legislative Assembly passed three decrees: one for the deportation
of non-juring priests, another to suppress the king's Constitutional Guard, and
a third for the establishment of a camp of "fédérés" near Paris. Louis
consented to sacrifice his guard, but vetoed the other decrees. Roland having
addressed to him an arrogant letter of remonstrance (mainly about the matter of
the non-juring priests), the king with the support of Dumouriez dismissed
Roland, Servan and Clavière. Dumouriez then took the ministry of war, and the
other places were filled with such men as could be had, mainly members of the
already collapsing Feuillant faction. Dumouriez, who cared only for the
successful prosecution of the war, urged the king to accept the decrees. As
Louis was obstinate, Dumouriez felt that he could do no more. Dumouriez
resigned office on 15 June 1792 and went to join the army of the north.
Lafayette, who remained faithful to the constitution of 1791, ventured on a
letter of remonstrance to the Assembly. It paid no attention, for Lafayette
could no longer sway the people. Furthermore, coming as it did from a young
general at the head of his army, the letter suggested to many ambition on
Lafayette's part. The left now suspected Lafayette of precisely the type of
ambition of which he had already been suspected by the court. Protests of 20
June. The Jacobins tried to frighten the king into accepting the decrees and
recalling his ministers. On 20 June 1792 the armed populace invaded the hall of
the Assembly and the royal apartments in the Tuileries. For some hours the king
and queen were in the utmost peril. With passive courage Louis refrained from
making any promise to the insurgents. The failure of the insurrection
encouraged a movement in favour of the king. Some twenty thousand Parisians
signed a petition expressing sympathy with Louis. Addresses of like tenor
poured in from the departments and the provincial cities. Lafayette himself
came to Paris in the hope of rallying the constitutional party, but the king
and queen eluded his offers of assistance. They had always disliked and
distrusted Lafayette and the Feuillants, and now preferred to rest their hopes
of deliverance on the foreigners. Lafayette returned to his troops without
having effected anything. The Girondins made a last advance to Louis, offering
to save the monarchy if he would accept them as ministers. His refusal united
all the Jacobins in the project of overturning the monarchy by force. The
Journée of 10 August. The ruling spirit of this new revolution was Danton, a
barrister only thirty-two years old, who had not sat in either Assembly,
although he had been the leader of the Cordeliers, an advanced republican club,
and had a strong hold on the common people of Paris. Danton and his friends
were assisted in their work by the fear of invasion, for the allied army was at
length mustering on the frontier. The Assembly declared the country in danger.
All the regular troops in or near Paris were sent to the front. Volunteers and
"fédérés" were constantly arriving in Paris, and, although most went on to
join the army, the Jacobins enlisted those who were suitable for their purpose,
especially some 500 whom Barbaroux, a Girondin, had summoned from Marseille. At
the same time the National Guard – up to now middle-class in character—was
opened to those from the lower classes. Brunswick's famous declaration of 25
July 1792, announcing that the allies would enter France to restore the royal
authority and would visit the Assembly and the city of Paris with military
execution if any further outrage were offered to the king, heated the
republican spirit to fury. It was resolved to strike the decisive blow on 10
August. On the night of 9 August a new revolutionary Paris Commune took
possession of the "Hôtel de Ville", and early on the morning of 10 August the
insurgents assailed the Tuileries. As the preparations of the Jacobins had been
notorious, some measures of defence had been taken. Besides a few gentlemen in
arms and a number of National Guards, the palace was garrisoned by the Swiss
Guard, about 950 strong. The disparity of force was not so great as to make
resistance altogether hopeless. But Louis let himself be persuaded into
betraying his own cause and retiring with his family under the shelter of the
Assembly. The National Guards either dispersed or fraternised with the
assailants. The Swiss Guard stood firm, and, possibly by accident, a fusillade
began. The enemy were gaining ground when the Swiss received an order from the
king to cease firing and withdraw. They were mostly shot down as they were
retiring, and of those who surrendered about 60 were massacred by the mob as
they were being taken under escort to the Hotel de Ville. Insurrection and
constitutional crisis. The king and queen spent long hours in a reporter's box
while the Legislative Assembly discussed their fate and the fate of the French
monarchy. Little more than a third of the deputies were present, almost all of
them Jacobins. They decreed that Louis should be suspended from his office and
that a convention should be summoned to give France a new constitution. An
executive council was formed by recalling Roland, Clavière and Servan to
office and joining with them Danton as minister of justice, Lebrun as minister
of foreign affairs, and Monge as minister of marine. When Lafayette heard of
the insurrection in Paris he tried to rally his troops in defence of the
constitution, but they refused to follow him. He was driven to cross the
frontier and surrender himself to the Austrians. Dumouriez was named his
successor. But the new government was still beset with danger. It had no root
in law and little hold on public opinion. It could not lean on the Assembly, a
mere shrunken remnant, whose days were numbered. It remained dependent on the
power which had set it up, the revolutionary Commune of Paris. The Commune
could therefore extort what concessions it pleased. It got the custody of the
king and his family, who were imprisoned in the Temple. Having obtained an
indefinite power of arrest, it soon filled the prisons of Paris. As the
elections to the Convention were close at hand, the Commune resolved to strike
the public with terror by the slaughter of its prisoners. It found its
opportunity in the progress of invasion. On 19 August 1792 Brunswick crossed
the frontier. On 22 August Longwy surrendered. Verdun was invested and seemed
likely to fall. On 1 September the Commune declared a state of emergency by
decreeing that on the following day the tocsin should be rung, all able-bodied
citizens convened in the Champ de Mars, and 60,000 volunteers enrolled for the
defence of the country. While this assembly was in progress teams of
executioners were sent to the prisons and began a butchery which lasted four
days and consumed 1400 victims. The Commune addressed a circular letter to the
other cities of France inviting them to follow this example. A number of state
prisoners awaiting trial at Orléans were ordered to Paris and on the way were
slaughtered at Versailles. The Assembly offered a feeble resistance to these
actions. Danton can hardly be acquitted of connivance at them. Roland hinted
disapproval, but did not venture more. He with many other Girondins had been
marked for slaughter in the original project. The elections to the Convention
were by almost universal suffrage, but indifference or intimidation reduced the
voters to a small number. Many who had sat in the National Constituent Assembly
and many more who had sat in the Legislative Assembly were returned. The
Convention met on 20 September and became the new "de facto" government of
France.
