Theory of the firm The theory of the firm consists of a number of economic
theories that describe, explain, and predict the nature of the firm, company,
or corporation, including its existence, behavior, structure, and relationship
to the market.¬ ¬ ‚Ä¢ Spulber, Daniel F. (2009). "The Theory of the Firm",
Cambridge. Description, front matter, and "Introduction" excerpt (press +).
Overview. Firms exist as an alternative system to the market-price mechanism
when it is more efficient to produce in a non-market environment. For example,
in a labor market, it might be very difficult or costly for firms or
organizations to engage in production when they have to hire and fire their
workers depending on demand/supply conditions. It might also be costly for
employees to shift companies every day looking for better alternatives. Thus,
firms engage in a long-term contract with their employees to minimize the
cost.¬ ¬  ‚Ä¢ Jean Tirole (1988). "The Theory of Industrial Organization". "The
Theory of the Firm," pp. 15‚Äì60. MIT Press.¬ ¬  ‚Ä¢ Luigi Zingales (2008).
"corporate governance," "The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics", 2nd
Edition. Abstract.¬ ¬  ‚Ä¢ Oliver E. Williamson (2002). "The Theory of the Firm
as Governance Structure: From Choice to Contract," "Journal of Economic
Perspectives", 16(3), pp. 171-195.¬ ¬  ‚Ä¢ _____ (2009). "Transaction Cost
Economics: The Natural Progression,"[http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/
economics/laureates/2009/williamson_lecture.pdf] Nobel lecture. Reprinted in
(2010) "American Economic Review", 100(3), pp. 673‚Äì90. Background. The First
World War period saw a change of emphasis in economic theory away from
industry-level analysis which mainly included analyzing markets to analysis at
the level of the firm, as it became increasingly clear that perfect competition
was no longer an adequate model of how firms behaved. Economic theory until
then had focused on trying to understand markets alone and there had been
little study on understanding why firms or organisations exist. Markets are
mainly guided by prices as illustrated by vegetable markets where a buyer is
free to switch sellers in an exchange. The need for a revised theory of the
firm was emphasized by empirical studies by Berle and Means, who made it clear
that ownership of a typical American corporation is spread over a wide number
of shareholders, leaving control in the hands of managers who own very little
equity themselves. Hall and Hitch found that executives made decisions by rule
of thumb rather than in the marginalist way. Transaction cost theory. According
to Ronald Coase, people begin to organise their production in firms when the
transaction cost of coordinating production through the market exchange, given
imperfect information, is greater than within the firm. Ronald Coase set out
his transaction cost theory of the firm in 1937, making it one of the first
(neo-classical) attempts to define the firm theoretically in relation to the
market. One aspect of its 'neoclassicism' lies in presenting an explanation of
the firm consistent with constant returns to scale, rather than relying on
increasing returns to scale. Another is in defining a firm in a manner which is
both realistic and compatible with the idea of substitution at the margin, so
instruments of conventional economic analysis apply. He notes that a firm‚Äôs
interactions with the market may not be under its control (for instance because
of sales taxes), but its internal allocation of resources are: ‚ÄúWithin a
firm, ‚Ä¶ market transactions are eliminated and in place of the complicated
market structure with exchange transactions is substituted the entrepreneur ‚Ä¶
who directs production.‚Äù He asks why alternative methods of production (such
as the price mechanism and economic planning), could not either achieve all
production, so that either firms use internal prices for all their production,
or one big firm runs the entire economy. Coase begins from the standpoint that
markets could in theory carry out all production, and that what needs to be
explained is the existence of the firm, with its "distinguishing mark ‚Ä¶ the
supersession of the price mechanism." Coase identifies some reasons why firms
might arise, and dismisses each as unimportant: Instead, for Coase the main
reason to establish a firm is to avoid some of the transaction costs of using
the price mechanism. These include discovering relevant prices (which can be
reduced but not eliminated by purchasing this information through specialists),
as well as the costs of negotiating and writing enforceable contracts for each
transaction (which can be large if there is uncertainty). Moreover, contracts
in an uncertain world will necessarily be incomplete and have to be frequently
re-negotiated. The costs of haggling about division of surplus, particularly if
there is asymmetric information and asset specificity, may be considerable. If
a firm operated internally under the market system, many contracts would be
required (for instance, even for procuring a pen or delivering a presentation).
In contrast, a real firm has very few (though much more complex) contracts,
such as defining a manager's power of direction over employees, in exchange for
which the employee is paid. These kinds of contracts are drawn up in situations
of uncertainty, in particular for relationships which last long periods of
time. Such a situation runs counter to neo-classical economic theory. The neo-
classical market is instantaneous, forbidding the development of extended
agent-principal (employee-manager) relationships, of planning, and of trust.
Coase concludes that ‚Äúa firm is likely therefore to emerge in those cases
where a very short-term contract would be unsatisfactory,‚Äù and that ‚Äúit
seems improbable that a firm would emerge without the existence of
uncertainty.‚Äù He notes that government measures relating to the market (sales
taxes, rationing, price controls) tend to increase the size of firms, since
firms internally would not be subject to such transaction costs. Thus, Coase
defines the firm as "the system of relationships which comes into existence
when the direction of resources is dependent on the entrepreneur." We can
therefore think of a firm as getting larger or smaller based on whether the
entrepreneur organises more or fewer transactions. The question then arises of
what determines the size of the firm; why does the entrepreneur organise the
transactions he does, why no more or less? Since the reason for the firm's
being is to have lower costs than the market, the upper limit on the firm's
size is set by costs rising to the point where internalising an additional
transaction equals the cost of making that transaction in the market. (At the
lower limit, the firm‚Äôs costs exceed the market‚Äôs costs, and it does not
come into existence.) In practice, diminishing returns to management contribute
most to raising the costs of organising a large firm, particularly in large
firms with many different plants and differing internal transactions (such as a
conglomerate), or if the relevant prices change frequently. Coase concludes by
saying that the size of the firm is dependent on the costs of using the price
mechanism, and on the costs of organisation of other entrepreneurs. These two
factors together determine how many products a firm produces and how much of
each. Reconsiderations of transaction cost theory. According to Putterman, most
economists accept distinction between intra-firm and interfirm transaction but
also that the two shade into each other; the extent of a firm is not simply
defined by its capital stock. Richardson for example, notes that a rigid
distinction fails because of the existence of intermediate forms between firm
and market such as inter-firm co-operation. Klein (1983) asserts that
‚ÄúEconomists now recognise that such a sharp distinction does not exist and
that it is useful to consider also transactions occurring within the firm as
representing market (contractual) relationships.‚Äù The costs involved in such
transactions that are within a firm or even between the firms are the
transaction costs. Ultimately, whether the firm constitutes a domain of
bureaucratic direction that is shielded from market forces or simply ‚Äúa legal
fiction‚Äù, ‚Äúa nexus for a set of contracting relationships among
individuals‚Äù (as Jensen and Meckling put it) is ‚Äúa function of the
completeness of markets and the ability of market forces to penetrate intra-
firm relationships‚Äù. Managerial and behavioural theories. It was only in the
1960s that the neo-classical theory of the firm was seriously challenged by
alternatives such as managerial and behavioral theories. Managerial theories of
the firm, as developed by William Baumol (1959 and 1962), Robin Marris (1964)
and Oliver E. Williamson (1966), suggest that managers would seek to maximise
their own utility and consider the implications of this for firm behavior in
contrast to the profit-maximising case. (Baumol suggested that managers‚Äô
interests are best served by maximising sales after achieving a minimum level
of profit which satisfies shareholders.) More recently this has developed into
‚Äòprincipal‚Äìagent‚Äô analysis (e.g. Spence and Zeckhauser and Ross (1973) on
problems of contracting with asymmetric information) which models a widely
applicable case where a principal (a shareholder or firm for example) cannot
costlessly infer how an agent (a manager or supplier, say) is behaving. This
may arise either because the agent has greater expertise or knowledge than the
principal, or because the principal cannot directly observe the agent‚Äôs
actions; it is asymmetric information which leads to a problem of moral hazard.
This means that to an extent managers can pursue their own interests.
Traditional managerial models typically assume that managers, instead of
maximising profit, maximise a simple objective utility function (this may
include salary, perks, security, power, prestige) subject to an arbitrarily
given profit constraint (profit satisficing). Behavioural approach. The
behavioural approach, as developed in particular by Richard Cyert and James G.
March of the Carnegie School places emphasis on explaining how decisions are
taken within the firm, and goes well beyond neo-classical economics. Much of
this depended on Herbert A. Simon‚Äôs work in the 1950s concerning behaviour in
situations of uncertainty, which argued that ‚Äúpeople possess limited
cognitive ability and so can exercise only ‚Äòbounded rationality‚Äô when
making decisions in complex, uncertain situations.‚Äù Thus individuals and
groups tend to ‚Äòsatisfice‚Äô‚Äîthat is, to attempt to attain realistic goals,
rather than maximize a utility or profit function. Cyert and March argued that
the firm cannot be regarded as a monolith, because different individuals and
groups within it have their own aspirations and conflicting interests, and that
firm behaviour is the weighted outcome of these conflicts. Organisational
mechanisms (such as ‚Äòsatisficing‚Äô and sequential decision-taking) exist to
maintain conflict at levels that are not unacceptably detrimental. Compared to
ideal state of productive efficiency, there is organisational slack
(Leibenstein‚Äôs X-inefficiency). Team production. Armen Alchian and Harold
Demsetz's analysis of team production is an extension and clarification of
earlier work by Coase. Thus according to them the firm emerges because extra
output is provided by team production, but that the success of this depends on
being able to manage the team so that metering problems (it is costly to
measure the marginal outputs of the co-operating inputs for reward purposes)
and attendant shirking (the moral hazard problem) can be overcome, by
estimating marginal productivity by observing or specifying input behaviour.
Such monitoring as is therefore necessary, however, can only be encouraged
effectively if the monitor is the recipient of the activity‚Äôs residual income
(otherwise the monitor herself would have to be monitored, ad infinitum). For
Alchian and Demsetz, the firm therefore is an entity which brings together a
team which is more productive working together than at arm‚Äôs length through
the market, because of informational problems associated with monitoring of
effort. In effect, therefore, this is a ‚Äòprincipal-agent‚Äô theory, since it
is asymmetric information within the firm which Alchian and Demsetz emphasise
must be overcome. In Barzel (1982)‚Äôs theory of the firm, drawing on Jensen
and Meckling (1976), the firm emerges as a means of centralising monitoring and
thereby avoiding costly redundancy in that function (since in a firm the
responsibility for monitoring can be centralised in a way that it cannot if
production is organised as a group of workers each acting as a firm). The
weakness in Alchian and Demsetz‚Äôs argument, according to Williamson, is that
their concept of team production has quite a narrow range of application, as it
assumes outputs cannot be related to individual inputs. In practice this may
have limited applicability (small work group activities, the largest perhaps a
symphony orchestra), since most outputs within a firm (such as manufacturing
and secretarial work) are separable, so that individual inputs can be rewarded
on the basis of outputs. Hence team production cannot offer the explanation of
why firms (in particular, large multi-plant and multi-product firms) exist.
Williamson's approach. For Oliver E. Williamson, the existence of firms derives
from ‚Äòasset specificity‚Äô in production, where assets are specific to each
other such that their value is much less in a second-best use. This causes
problems if the assets are owned by different firms (such as purchaser and
supplier), because it will lead to protracted bargaining concerning the gains
from trade, because both agents are likely to become locked into a position
where they are no longer competing with a (possibly large) number of agents in
the entire market, and the incentives are no longer there to represent their
positions honestly: large-numbers bargaining is transformed into small-number
bargaining. If the transaction is a recurring or lengthy one, re-negotiation
may be necessary as a continual power struggle takes place concerning the gains
from trade, further increasing the transaction costs. Moreover there are likely
to be situations where a purchaser may require a particular, firm-specific
investment of a supplier which would be profitable for both; but after the
investment has been made it becomes a sunk cost and the purchaser can attempt
to re-negotiate the contract such that the supplier may make a loss on the
investment (this is the hold-up problem, which occurs when either party
asymmetrically incurs substantial costs or benefits before being paid for or
paying for them). In this kind of a situation, the most efficient way to
overcome the continual conflict of interest between the two agents (or
coalitions of agents) may be the removal of one of them from the equation by
takeover or merger. Asset specificity can also apply to some extent to both
physical and human capital, so that the hold-up problem can also occur with
labour (e.g. labour can threaten a strike, because of the lack of good
alternative human capital; but equally the firm can threaten to fire). Probably
the best constraint on such opportunism is reputation (rather than the law,
because of the difficulty of negotiating, writing and enforcement of
contracts). If a reputation for opportunism significantly damages an agent‚Äôs
dealings in the future, this alters the incentives to be opportunistic.
Williamson sees the limit on the size of the firm as being given partly by
costs of delegation (as a firm‚Äôs size increase its hierarchical bureaucracy
does too), and the large firm‚Äôs increasing inability to replicate the high-
powered incentives of the residual income of an owner-entrepreneur. This is
partly because it is in the nature of a large firm that its existence is more
secure and less dependent on the actions of any one individual (increasing the
incentives to shirk), and because intervention rights from the centre
characteristic of a firm tend to be accompanied by some form of income
insurance to compensate for the lesser responsibility, thereby diluting
incentives. Milgrom and Roberts (1990) explain the increased cost of management
as due to the incentives of employees to provide false information beneficial
to themselves, resulting in costs to managers of filtering information, and
often the making of decisions without full information. This grows worse with
firm size and more layers in the hierarchy. Empirical analyses of transaction
costs have rarely attempted to measure and operationalize transaction costs.
Research that attempts to measure transaction costs is the most critical limit
to efforts to potential falsification and validation of transaction cost
economics. Firm economies. The theory of the firm considers what bounds the
size and output variety of firms. This includes how firms may be able to
combine labour and capital so as to lower the average cost of output, either
from increasing, decreasing, or constant returns to scale for one product line
or from economies of scope for more than one product line. Other models.
Efficiency wage models like that of Shapiro and Stiglitz (1984) suggest wage
rents as an addition to monitoring, since this gives employees an incentive not
to shirk, given a certain probability of detection and the consequence of being
fired. Williamson, Wachter and Harris (1975) suggest promotion incentives
within the firm as an alternative to morale-damaging monitoring, where
promotion is based on objectively measurable performance. (The difference
between these two approaches may be that the former is applicable to a blue-
collar environment, the latter to a white-collar one). Leibenstein (1966) sees
a firm‚Äôs norms or conventions, dependent on its history of management
initiatives, labour relations and other factors, as determining the firm‚Äôs
‚Äòculture‚Äô of effort, thus affecting the firm‚Äôs productivity and hence
size. George Akerlof (1982) develops a gift exchange model of reciprocity, in
which employers offer wages unrelated to variations in output and above the
market level, and workers have developed a concern for each other‚Äôs welfare,
such that all put in effort above the minimum required, but the more able
workers are not rewarded for their extra productivity; again, size here depends
not on rationality or efficiency but on social factors. In sum, the limit to
the firm‚Äôs size is given where costs rise to the point where the market can
undertake some transactions more efficiently than the firm. Recently, Yochai
Benkler further questioned the rigid distinction between firms and markets
based on the increasing salience of ‚Äúcommons-based peer production‚Äù systems
such as open source software (e.g. Linux), Wikipedia, Creative Commons, etc. He
put forth this argument in "The Wealth of Networks: How Social Production
Transforms Markets and Freedom", which was released in 2006 under a Creative
Commons share-alike license. Legacy. Looking back in the context of the 2012 US
presidential campaign, Nicholas Lemann in "The New Yorker" wrote that the 1976
Jensen/Meckling article "provided the intellectual foundation for bringing
together one set of ideas about how to change the ownership structure of a
company the theory of the firm, with another set of ideas about how to change
the way it operated management consulting. That consolidation led to the
creation of Bain Capital, in 1984, and made Mitt Romney very rich."
