Theocracy Theocracy is a form of government in which God is the Civil Ruler and
the official policy is governed by immediate divine guidance or by officials
who are regarded as divinely guided, or is pursuant to the doctrine of a
particular religion or religious group. From the perspective of the theocratic
government, "God himself is recognized as the head" of the state, hence the
term "theocracy", from the Greek "rule of God", a term used by Josephus for the
kingdoms of Israel and Judah. A theocracy may have an administrative hierarchy
of the government identical with the administrative hierarchy of the religion,
or it may have two 'arms,' but with the state administrative hierarchy
subordinate to the religious hierarchy. Taken literally or strictly,
"theocracy" means rule by God or gods and refers primarily to an internal "rule
of the heart", especially in its biblical application. The common, generic use
of the term, as defined above in terms of rule by a church or analogous
religious leadership, would be more accurately described as an "ecclesiocracy".
In a pure theocracy, the civil leader is believed to have a direct personal
connection with God. For example, a prophet like Moses led the Israelites, and
the prophet Muhammad ruled the early Muslims. Law proclaimed by the ruler is
also considered a divine revelation, and hence the law of God. An
ecclesiocracy, on the other hand, is a situation where the religious leaders
assume a leading role in the state, but do not claim that they are instruments
of divine revelation. For example, the prince-bishops of the European Middle
Ages, where the bishop was also the temporal ruler. The papacy in the Papal
States occupied a middle ground between theocracy and ecclesiocracy, since the
pope did not claim he is a prophet who receives revelation from God, but merely
the (in rare cases infallible) interpreter of already-received revelation.
Religiously endorsed monarchies fall between these two poles, according to the
relative strengths of the religious and political organs. Theocracy should be
distinguished from other, secular, forms of government that have a state
religion, or are merely influenced by theological or moral concepts, and
monarchies held "By the Grace of God". In the most common usage of the term,
some civil rulers are leaders of the dominant religion (e.g., the Byzantine
emperor as patron of the head of the official Church); the government claims to
rule on behalf of God or a higher power, as specified by the local religion,
and divine approval of government institutions and laws. These characteristics
apply also to a caesaropapist regime. The Byzantine Empire however was not
theocratic since the patriarch answered to the emperor, not vice versa;
similarly in Tudor England the crown forced the church to break away from Rome
so the royal (and, especially later, parliamentary) power could assume full
control of the now Anglican hierarchy and confiscate most church property and
income. Secular governments can also coexist with a state religion or delegate
some aspects of civil law to religious communities. For example, in Israel
marriage is governed by officially recognized religious bodies who each provide
marriage services for their respected adherents, yet no form of civil marriage
(free of religion, for atheists, for example) exists nor marriage by non-
recognized minority religions. India similarly delegates control of marriage
and some other civil matters to the religious communities, in large part as a
way of accommodating its Muslim minority. Etymology. The word "theocracy"
originates from the Greek , meaning "the rule of God". This in turn derives
from the Ancient Greek θεός ("theos"), meaning "god", and κρατέω
("krateo"), meaning "to rule." Thus the meaning of the word in Greek was "rule
by god(s)" or human incarnation(s) of god(s). It was first coined by Josephus
Flavius in the first century A.D. to describe the characteristic government for
Jews. Josephus argued that while the Greeks recognized three types of
government: monarchy, aristocracy, and anarchy, the Jews were unique in that
they had a system of government that did not fit into those categories.
Josephus understood theocracy as a fourth form of government in which only God
and his law is sovereign. Josephus' definition was widely accepted until the
Enlightenment era, when the term started to collect more universalistic and
negative connotations, especially in Hegel's hands. The first recorded English
use was in 1622, with the meaning "sacerdotal government under divine
inspiration" (as in Biblical Israel before the rise of kings); the meaning
"priestly or religious body wielding political and civil power" is recorded
from 1825. Current theocracies. Christian theocracies. Holy See (Vatican City).
Following the unification of Italy, Vatican City became the last surviving
territory of the former Papal States. In 1929, the State of Vatican City was
formally recognized as an independent state through treaties with the Italian
government. The head of state of the Vatican is the pope, elected by the
College of Cardinals, an assembly of Senatorial-princes of the Church, who are
usually clerics, appointed as Ordinaries, but in the past have also included
men who were not bishops nor clerics. A pope is elected for life, and voting is
limited to cardinals under 80 years of age. A Secretary for Relations with
States, directly responsible for international relations, is appointed by the
pope. The Vatican legal system is rooted in canon law but ultimately is decided
by the pope; the Bishop of Rome as the Supreme Pontiff, ""has the fullness of
legislative, executive and judicial powers."" Although the laws of Vatican City
come from the secular laws of Italy, under article 3 of the Law of the Sources
of the Law, provision is made for the supplementary application of the “laws
promulgated by the Kingdom of Italy.” The government of the Vatican can also
be considered an ecclesiocracy (ruled by the Church) Islamic states or Islamic
theocracies. An Islamic state is a state that has adopted Islam, specifically
Sharia, as its foundations for political institutions, or laws, exclusively,
and has implemented the Islamic ruling system "khilafah" (Arabic: خلافة),
and is therefore a theocracy. Although there is much debate as to which states
or groups operate strictly according to Islamic Law, Sharia is the official
basis for state laws in the following countries: Yemen, Afghanistan, Somalia,
Sudan, Saudi Arabia, Mauritania, Oman and Iran. In Nigeria, the constitution
provides that states may elect to use Shari'a laws and courts, though non-
Muslims are not required in any state to submit to Shari'a jurisdiction and
adherence varies by state. Saudi Arabia maintains religious courts for all
aspects of law and has religious police to maintain social compliance. Also
Iran maintains religious courts for all aspects of law and has religious police
to maintain social compliance, while its government is described by the US
Central Intelligence Agency as a "theocratic republic". Iran's head of state,
or Supreme Leader, is appointed by an elected body called Assembly of Experts.
The Council of Guardians, considered part of the executive branch of
government, is responsible for determining if legislation is in line with
Islamic law and customs (the Sharia), and can bar candidates from elections,
and greenlight or ban investigations into the election process. Pakistan has
Islam as its only official religion and its Federal Shariat Court has the duty
of striking down any law not complying with the Sharia code of Islamic law;
however, ruling falls upon legal scholars who, while required to be Muslim, are
not religious clergy. Central Tibetan Administration. The Central Tibetan
Administration, colloquially known as the Tibetan government in exile, is a
Tibetan exile organisation with a state-like internal structure. According to
its charter, the position of head of state of the Central Tibetan
Administration belongs "ex officio" to the current Dalai Lama, a religious
hierarch. In this respect, it continues the traditions of the former government
of Tibet, which was ruled by the Dalai Lamas and their ministers, with a
specific role reserved for a class of monk officials. On March 14, 2011, at the
14th Dalai Lama's suggestion, the parliament of the Central Tibetan
Administration began considering a proposal to remove the Dalai Lama's role as
head of state in favor of an elected leader. States with official state
religion. Having a state religion is not sufficient to be a theocracy. Many
countries have a state religion without government directly deriving its powers
from a divine authority, or direct government powers exercised by religious
authority. Historic states with theocratic aspects. The largest and best known
theocracies in history were the Umayyad and early Abassid Caliphate, and the
Papal States. And as with any other state or empire, pragmatism was part of the
politics of these "de jure" theocracies. Antiquity. The imperial cults in
Ancient Egypt and elsewhere deified the ruling monarch, so that the state
religion was dedicated to the worship of the ruler as a deity, or the
incarnation of a deity. Early Israel was ruled by Judges before instituting a
monarchy. The Judges were believed to be representatives of YHWH or Jehovah
God. In ancient and medieval Christianity, Caesaropapism is the doctrine where
a head of state is at the same time the head of the church. Christian. Geneva,
during the period of John Calvin's greatest influence and the Massachusetts Bay
Colony of the "Puritans" had many characteristics of Protestant theocracies.
During the short reign (1494–1498) of Girolamo Savonarola, a Dominican
priest, the city of Florence could have been considered a theocracy. During his
rule, un-Christian books, statues, poetry, and other items were burned (in the
Bonfire of the Vanities), sodomy was made a capital offense, and other
Christian practices became law. Although having a lay ruler (the King of
Jerusalem) the Crusader Kingdom of Jerusalem (1099-1299) is considered to have
some theocratic influences. Also the Commonwealth of England under Oliver
Cromwell as Lord Protector is also considered to have a considerable amount of
theocratic influence. The Heavenly Kingdom of Great Peace, the rebel faction of
the Taiping Rebellion in 1860s Qing China was a heterodox Christian Theocracy
led by the self-proclaimed younger brother of Jesus Christ, Hong Xiuquan. This
theocratic state fought one of the most destructive wars in history,
essentially being a haphazard proto - Communist military dictatorship, against
the Qing Dynasty for fifteen years before being crushed following the fall of
the capital Nanking. Mormonism. Another ecclesiocracy was the administration of
the short-lived State of Deseret, an independent entity briefly organized in
the American West by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Its
original borders stretched from western Colorado to the southern California
coast. When the Mormons arrived in the valley of the Great Salt Lake in 1847,
the Great Basin was still a part of Mexico and had no secular government. As a
result, Brigham Young administered the region both spiritually and temporally
through the highly organized and centralized Melchizedek Priesthood. This
original organization was based upon a concept called theodemocracy, a
governmental system combining Biblical theocracy with mid-19th-century American
political ideals, including heavy reliance upon the U.S. Constitution. The
treaty of Guadalupe Hildalgo resulted in the Mexican Cession by which Deseret
was incorporated into the United States. In 1849, the Saints organized a
secular government in Utah, although many ecclesiatical leaders maintained
their positions of secular power. The Mormons also petitioned Congress to have
Deseret admitted into the Union as a state. However, under the Compromise of
1850, Utah Territory was created and Brigham Young was appointed governor. In
this situation, Young still stood as head of the LDS Church as well as Utah's
secular government. After the abortive Utah War of 1857–1858, the replacement
of Young by an outside Federal Territorial Governor, the eventual resolution of
controversies regarding plural marriage, and accession by Utah to statehood,
the apparent temporal aspects of LDS theodemocracy receded markedly. However,
— like many Christians, Jews, and Muslims — Latter-day Saints regard some
form of theocracy with God as the head (king) of a chiliastic world government
to be the true political ideal. But, until the Second Coming of Christ, the
Mormons teach in their 12th Article of Faith: submission to the powers that be.
But true to their beliefs in individual liberty and moral accountability, they
exhibit a strong preference for democratic-republican, representative
government as embodied in the Constitution of the United States. Montenegro.
Prince-Bishopric of Montenegro offers a singular example of monarchs willingly
turning their power to ecclesiastic authority (Montenegrin Orthodox), as the
last of the House of Crnojević (styled Grand Voivode, not sovereign princes)
did, in order to preserve national unity before the Ottoman onslaught as a
separate millet under an autochthonous ethnarch. When Montenegro re-established
secular dynastic succession by the proclamation of princedom in 1851, it did so
in favor of the last Prince-bishop, who changed his style from "Vladika i
upravitelj Crne Gore i Brde" "Vladika (Bishop) and Ruler of Montenegro and
Brda" to Po "Bozjoj milosti knjaz i gospodar Crne Gore i Brde" "By the grace of
God Prince and Sovereign of Montenegro and Brda", thus rendering his "de facto"
dynasty (the Petrović-Njegoš family since 1696) a hereditary one. Islam.
Islam for centuries successfully implemented a theocracy. Starting from the
time when the Prophet Muhammad established the Islamic State in Medina in the
7th century all the way to the early 20th century when the last Caliphate was
dissolved in Turkey. After the time of the Prophet, Caliphs (from the Arabic
word "Khalifah" which means successor of the Prophet), would rule according to
the Law of Islam, which consists of the law found in the Quran and in the
narrations from the Prophet. Although the Caliphs did not receive revelation
directly from Allah as did the Prophet, they were required to base all of their
decrees on some evidence found in the revealed text. This connection with the
revealed text demonstrated that Allah was the ultimate authority. Buddhism.
Unified religious rule in Tibet began in 1642, when the Fifth Dalai Lama allied
with the military power of the Mongol Gushri Khan to consolidate the political
power and center control around his office as head of the Gelug school. This
form of government is known as the dual system of government. Prior to 1642,
particular monasteries and monks had held considerable power throughout Tibet,
but had not achieved anything approaching complete control, though power
continued to be held in a diffuse, feudal system after the ascension of the
Fifth Dalai Lama. Power in Tibet was held by a number of traditional elites,
including members of the nobility, the heads of the major Buddhist sects
(including their various tulkus), and various large and influential monastic
communities. Political power was sometimes used by monastic leaders to suppress
rival religious schools through the confiscation of property and direct
violence. Social mobility was somewhat possible through the attainment of a
monastic education, or recognition as a reincarnated teacher, but such
institutions were dominated by the traditional elites and governed by political
intrigue. Non-Buddhists in Tibet were members of an outcast underclass. The
Bogd Khaanate period of Mongolia (1911-1919) is also cited as a former Buddhist
theocracy. Alleged theocracies. United States of America. Critics have argued
that the US state of Utah is a theocracy. They point out that all of the
state's representatives in Congress, all of its Supreme Court, 90% of its
legislature and 80% of its state and federal judges belong to the Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints. In June 2012, the U.S. Justice Department
filed a lawsuit against government officials in Colorado City, Arizona and
Hildale, Utah, for alleged civil rights violations, including acting as de
facto agents for the Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints
- a Mormon sect that split off in order to continue the practice of polygamy -
denying ex-members and non-members of the Church access to everything from
police services to housing and utilities. Fictional theocracies. Depictions of
a fictional society dominated by a theocracy recur in science fiction,
speculative fiction and fantasy. Such depictions are mostly dystopian, and in
some cases humorous or satirical; positively presented theocracies are very
much the exception.
