Thermidorian Reaction The Thermidorian Reaction was a revolt in the French
Revolution against perceived excesses of the Reign of Terror. It was triggered
by a vote of the National Convention to execute Maximilien Robespierre, Louis
Antoine de Saint-Just and several other leading members of the Terror. This
ended the most radical phase of the French Revolution. The name "Thermidorian"
refers to 9 Thermidor Year II (27 July 1794), the date according to the French
Revolutionary Calendar when Robespierre and other radical revolutionaries came
under concerted attack in the National Convention. "Thermidorian Reaction" also
refers to the remaining period until the National Convention was superseded by
the Directory; this is also sometimes called the era of the Thermidorian
Convention. Prominent figures of Thermidor include Paul Barras, Jean-Lambert
Tallien and Joseph Fouché. Background. Thermidor represents the final throes
of the Reign of Terror. With Robespierre the sole remaining strong man of the
Revolution (following the assassination of Jean-Paul Marat, and the executions
of Georges Danton and Jacques Hébert), his apparently total grasp on power
was, in fact, increasingly illusory, especially insofar as he seemed to have
support from factions to his right. His only real political power at this time
lay in the Jacobin Club, which had extended itself beyond the borders of Paris
and into the country as a network of "Popular Societies". His tight personal
control of the military and his distrust of military might and of banks, along
with his opposition to corrupt individuals in government, made Robespierre the
subject of a number of conspiracies. The conspiracies came together on 9
Thermidor (27 July) when members of the national bodies of the revolutionary
government arrested Robespierre as well as the leaders of the Paris city
government. Conspiratorial groups. Not all of the conspiratorial groupings were
ideological in motivation; many who conspired against Robespierre did so for
strong practical and personal reasons, most notably self-preservation. The
surviving Dantonists, such as Merlin de Thionville for example, wanted revenge
for the death of Danton and, more importantly, to protect their own heads. The
Left were opposed to Robespierre on the grounds that he rejected atheism and
was not sufficiently radical. The prime mover, however, for the events of 9
Thermidor (27 July) was a Montagnard conspiracy, led by Jean-Lambert Tallien
and Bourdon de l'Oise, which was gradually coalescing, and was to come to pass
at the time when the Montagnards had finally swayed the deputies of the Right
over to their side. (Robespierre and Saint-Just were, themselves, Montagnards.)
Some authors argue that the then leftist Joseph Fouché played a large role in
the conspiracy. Fouché was likely to be convicted and executed for treason and
atheism, since Robespierre himself was about to denounce him in a speech to the
Convention, which would have been delivered the day after the coup d'état (28
July). Dwelling in the shadows, he made great efforts to convince the main
surviving leftists and moderates that they were meant to be the next victims of
Robespierre's dictatorship, thus uniting them against Robespierre, and by those
means saving his own life. In the end, it was Robespierre himself who united
all his enemies. On 8 Thermidor (26 July) he gave a speech to the Convention in
which he railed against enemies and conspiracies, some within the powerful
committees, as he did not give the names of "these traitors", all in the
Convention had reason to fear that they were the targets. Later he went and
enlisted the support of the Jacobin Club, where he denounced Collot and
Billaud. These men then spent the night planning the following day’s coup
with other members of the convention. Events. On 9 Thermidor (27 July), in the
Hall of Liberty in Paris, Saint-Just was in the midst of reading a report to
the Committee of Public Safety when he was interrupted by Tallien, who impugned
Saint-Just and then went on to denounce the tyranny of Robespierre. The attack
was taken up by Billaud-Varenne, and Saint-Just's typical eloquence fled him,
leaving him subject to a withering verbal assault until Robespierre leapt to
the defense of Saint-Just and himself. Cries went up of 'Down with the tyrant!
Arrest him!' Robespierre then made his appeal to the deputies of the Right,
"Deputies of the Right, men of honour, men of virtue, give me the floor, since
the assassins will not." However, the Right was unmoved, and an order was made
to arrest Robespierre and his followers. Troops from the Paris Commune arrived
to liberate the prisoners. The Commune troops, under General Coffinhal, then
marched against the Convention itself. The Convention responded by ordering
troops of its own under Paul Barras to be called out. When the Commune's troops
heard the news of this, order began to break down, and Hanriot ordered his
remaining troops to withdraw to the Hôtel de Ville. Robespierre and his
supporters also gathered at the Hôtel de Ville. The Convention declared them
to be outlaws, meaning that upon verification the fugitives could be executed
within 24 hours without a trial. As the night went on the Commune forces at the
Hôtel de Ville deserted until none of them remained. The Convention troops
under Barras approached the Hôtel around 2:00 am on 28 July. As they came,
Robespierre's brother Augustin leapt out of a window in an escape attempt,
broke his legs, and was arrested. Le Bas committed suicide. Couthon, who was
paralysed from the waist down, was found lying at the bottom of a staircase.
Robespierre was shot in the face, and his jaw was shattered. There are two
accounts of how he received the wound. One states that, anticipating his own
downfall and wanting to have the death of a hero, Robespierre attempted to kill
himself and shattered his own jaw with a shot. The contrary view is that he was
shot by one of the Convention's troops. At the time, a "gendarme" named
Charles-André Merda claimed to have pulled the trigger. Saint-Just made no
attempt at suicide or concealment. Hanriot tried to hide in the Hôtel de
Ville's yard, by some sources after being thrown out a window into a stack of
latrine and hay, but the Convention troops quickly discovered him and assaulted
him badly, allegedly gouging one of his eyes out so that it hung from its
socket. Consequences of the Reaction. The events of 9 Thermidor were to prove a
watershed in the revolutionary process. The Thermidorian regime that followed
was, at the very least, less rigid, ending the Reign of Terror and allowing for
more individual liberty, especially in areas of religion. At the same time, its
economic policies paved the way for rampant inflation. Ultimately, power
devolved to the hands of the Directory, an executive of five men who assumed
power in France in year III of the French Revolution. The Thermidorian regime
excluded the remaining Montagnards from power, even those who had joined in
conspiring against Robespierre and Saint-Just. The White Terror resulted in
numerous imprisonments and several hundred executions, almost exclusively of
people on the political left. These numbers, while significant, were
considerably smaller than those associated with the previous Reign of Terror,
which killed tens of thousands, however, even in smaller numbers, said
executions were made for revenge against the Jacobins and mostly for political
differences rather than due to a perceived or real threat to the people, as the
previous terror was, and many of the victims were executed without a trial.
Thermidorian regime. “On July 29 the victor of the 9th Thermidor condemned
seventy members of the Paris Commune to death; thereafter the Commune was
subject to the Convention” As part of the reorganization of French politics,
practitioners of the terror were called to defend their records, some such as
Tallien, Fouché and Fréron rejoined the leadership. Others such as Billaud-
Varenne, Collot d’Herbois, Barère & Vadier were sentenced to exile in South
America. (Although the last two managed to evade arrest). Many Jacobin clubs
were closed. Freedom of worship was extended first to the Vendée and later to
all France. On 24 December 1794 the Maximum, (Controls on prices and wages),
was abolished. The government exacerbated this inflationary move by issuing
more assignats. In April and May of 1795 protests and riots in support of the
radicals broke out culminating in an invasion of the Convention by an
insurrectionary mob on 20 May. On 22 May the Convention struck back, having
troops under Pichegru surround the Faubourg St-Antoine and force the
capitulation of the armed rebels. In May and June 1795, a ‘White Terror’
raged in which Jacobins were victims and the judges were bourgeois
‘Moderates’”. Throughout France the events of the September Massacres
were repeated, however this time the victims were imprisoned officials of the
terror. In Paris, Royalist sentiments were openly tolerated. Meanwhile French
Armies overran the Netherlands and established the Batavian Republic, occupied
the left bank of the Rhine and forced Spain, Prussia and several German States
to sue for peace enhancing the prestige of the Convention. A new constitution
was drawn up which eased back some of the democratic elements of the
constitution of 1793 establishing an electoral college for the election of
officials, a bicameral legislature and other provisions designed to protect the
current holders of power. On 5 October (13 Vendémiaire), a revolt lead by
Royalists challenged the Convention. It was put down by Napoleon with "a whiff
of grapeshot". On 25 October the Convention declared itself dissolved and was
replaced by the French Directory on 2 November. Other Thermidorian Reactions.
For historians of revolutionary movements, the term "Thermidor" has come to
mean the phase in some revolutions when power slips from the hands of the
original revolutionary leadership and a radical regime is replaced by a more
conservative regime, sometimes to the point where the political pendulum may
swing back towards something resembling a pre-revolutionary state. Leon
Trotsky, in his book "The Revolution Betrayed", alleges the rise of Joseph
Stalin to power was a "Soviet Thermidor".
