Boatmen of Thessaloníki The Boatmen of Thessaloníki (, , "Gemidzhiite") or
the Assassins of Salonica, were an anarchistic group active in the Ottoman
Empire in the years around 1900. Its members were young graduates from the
Bulgarian Men's High School of Thessaloniki. From 28 April until 1 May 1903 the
group launched a campaign of terror bombing in Thessaloniki, the so called
"Thessaloniki bombings of 1903". Their aim was to attract the attention of the
Great Powers to Ottoman oppression in Macedonia and Thrace. Origins and
etymology. The Bulgarian anarchist movement grew in the 1890s, and the
territory of Principality of Bulgaria became a staging-point for anarchist
activities against the Ottomans, particularly in support of Macedonian and
Thracian liberation movements. The Boatmen of Thessaloníki were a descendant
of a founded in 1895 in Plovdiv ""Macedonian Secret Revolutionary Committee"",
which was developed later in Geneve in a secret, anarchistic, brotherhood
called ""Geneve group"". Its activists were the students Michail Gerdjikov,
Petar Mandjukov and Slavi Merdjanov. They were influenced from the anarcho-
nationalism, which emerged in Europe, following the French Revolution, going
back at least to Mikhail Bakunin and his involvement with the Pan-Slavic
movement. Bulgarian anarchists in the so-called “Geneva group” of students
played key roles in the anti-Ottoman struggles. Later Merdjanov moved to the
Bulgarian school in Salonika, where he worked as teacher and sparked some of
the graduates with this ideas. The first meetings of the group took part in
1898 with the purpose of forming a revolutionary terrorist group with the
purpose of changing international public opinion in the matter of the freedom
of Macedonia and Adrianople Thrace through urging the social conscience of the
oppressed. The group is found in published works with several names: "The
boatmen of Thessaloniki", the "Crew", or the "Gemitzides", form of the Turkish
word for "boatman". At their start, they had a different name, the
"Troublemakers", "gürültücü". The name "boatmen" was due to "leaving behind
the everyday life and the limits of law and sail with a boat in the free and
wild seas of lawlessness." Attack plans. At first the anarchists started to
make plans for a bomb attack in Istanbul. In the summer of 1899, under the
leadership of Slavi Merdjanov the group planned the assassination of the
Sultan. Merdzjanov, Petar Sokolov and their friend, the anarchist Petar
Mandjukov, approached Boris Sarafov, the leader of Supreme Macedonian-
Adrianople Committee, and asked him for funds to finance large-scale terrorist
activities in the main towns of European Turkey. He promised to provide money,
and the three left for Istanbul, where after much discussion, they decided to
assassinate the Sultan. In December of the same year Merdjanov was connected by
the secretary of Bulgarian Exarchate Dimitar Lyapov with local Armenian
revolutionaries. Here they established that even with the help of the Armenians
it was impossible to do it. Quite early on, they decided that the effect of the
explosion would be greater if there were parallel actions in other towns, and
they consulted with Jordan Popjordanov, a member of a small terrorist group in
Salonika, who agreed to blow up the Salonika branch of the Ottoman Bank. He
enlisted the aid of a number of close friends. Salonika terrorists were very
young men, mostly from Veles, pupils in the Bulgarian High School. The Salonika
terrorist group called itself "the Gemidzhi". They planned to begin by blowing
up the central offices of the Ottoman Bank in Salonika and Istanbul. During
1900 Merdjanov arrived again in Istanbul to discuss the plan with the
Armenians, and afterward the terrorists started to work, digging tunnels in
both places. On 18 September 1900 the Ottoman police apprehended a member of a
group, who was carrying the explosives and later the whole group was arrested,
including Merdjanov, Sokolov and Pavel Shatev. The core was hastily disbanded
for security and only Pingov stayed in Thessaloníki to prepare future
activity. In 1901 the prisoners were deported το Bulgaria, after pressure
from the Bulgarian government. Merdzjanov and Sokolov went to Sofia and began
to think up new ideas, one of which was to hold up the Orient Express on
Turkish territory near Adrianople, and to gain possession of the mail in order
to finance future actions. In pursuit of this plan, they went to the Adrianople
area in July 1901, with a cheta consisting of ten men, equipped with the help
of Pavel Genadiev, the Supreme Macedonian Committee's representative in
Plovdiv. The cheta managed to place a large quantity of dynamite on the railway
line, but something went wrong, and the train passed undamaged. After this
failure, they kidnapped the son of a rich Turkish landowner, but they were soon
discovered and surrounded by large Turkish forces. In a battle which lasted
several hours, most of the chetnitsi were killed or seriously wounded. Sokolov
was among the dead, and Merdzjanov was captured alive, together with a
Bulgarian from Lozengrad, and two Armenians. The captives were taken to
Adrianople, where, in November 1901, all four were publicly hanged. The
Gemidzhii were ready for action again in 1902, but the seizure in Dedeagach of
dynamite, arranged by Supreme Macedonian Committee's leader Boris Sarafov,
forced the group to abandon planned attacks in Adrianople, and to restrict its
activity. Afterwards the members of the group went to Thessaloniki and
continued to plan their new bombings. Bombings. On the 28 April 1903, a member
of the group, Pavel Shatev, used dynamite to blow up the French ship
“Guadalquivir” which was leaving the Thessaloniki harbour. The bomber left
the ship together with the other passengers, but was caught later by the
Turkish police at the Skopje train station. The same night, other group
bombers: Dimitar Mechev, Iliya Trachkov, and Milan Arsov, struck the railway
between Thessaloniki and Istanbul, causing damage to the locomotive and some of
the cars of a passing train without wounding any passengers. The next day, the
commencing signal for the large raid in Thessaloniki was given by Kostadin
Kirkov who used explosives to shut off the electricity and water supply systems
of the city. Jordan Popjordanov (Orceto) blew up the building of an Ottoman
Bank office, under which the "gemidzhii" had previously dug a tunnel. Milan
Arsov threw bombs in the "Alhambra" Café. The same night, Kostadin Kirkov,
Iliya Bogdanov and Vladimir Pingov detonated bombs in different parts of the
city. Dimitar Mechev and Iliya Truchkov failed to blast the reservoir of a gas-
producing plant. They ware later killed in their quarters during a shoot-out
with army and gendarmerie forces, against which Mechev and Trachkov used more
than 60 bombs. Jordan Popjordanov was killed on April 30. In May, Kostadin
Kirkov was killed while trying to blow up a postal office. Right before being
caught, Cvetko Traikov, whose mission was to kill the local governor, killed
himself by setting off a bomb and then sitting on it. Aftermath. In the wake of
the attacks, martial law was declared in the city. As a response the Turkish
Army and "bashibozouks" massacred many innocent Bulgarian citizens in
Thessaloniki, and later in Bitola. Pavel Shatev, Marko Boshnakov, Georgi
Bogdanov and Milan Arsov ware arrested and sentenced by a court martial to a
penal colony in Fezzan. Also a members of the Central Committee of IMORO,
including Ivan Garvanov, D. Mirchev, and J. Kondov were incarcerated. In Libya
Boshnakov died from malaria on February 14, 1908 and Arsov from exhaustion on
June 8, the same year. After July 30, 1908, because of the victory of the
movement of the Young Turks, amnesty was given and the two remaining "Boatmen".
They cut the heads of their dead comrades and arrive in Thessaloníki on the
October 18th, where they give the heads to the parents of the deceased. Modern
references. As part of the project Skopje 2014, a monument was erected in the
centre of Skopje, Macedonia in 2010, in honour of "Гемиџии" (Boatmen of
Thessaloníki). The Municipality of Veles also constructed a monument by a
recently built iron bridge.
