Thomas Sowell Thomas Sowell (born June 30, 1930) is an American economist,
social theorist, political philosopher, and author. A National Humanities Medal
winner, he advocates laissez-faire economics and writes from a conservative and
libertarian perspective. He is currently the Rose and Milton Friedman Senior
Fellow on Public Policy at the Hoover Institution, Stanford University. He is
considered a leading representative of the Chicago school of economics. Sowell
was born in North Carolina, but grew up in Harlem, New York. He dropped out of
high school, and served in the United States Marine Corps during the Korean
War. He received a bachelor's degree from Harvard University in 1958 and a
master's degree from Columbia University in 1959. In 1968, he earned his
doctorate degree in Economics from the University of Chicago. Sowell has served
on the faculties of several universities, including Cornell University and
University of California, Los Angeles, and worked for think tanks such as the
Urban Institute. Since 1980 he has worked at the Hoover Institution. He is the
author of more than 30 books. Biography. Sowell was born in Gastonia, North
Carolina. His father died shortly before he was born, and his mother, a
housemaid, already had four children. A great-aunt and her two grown daughters
adopted Sowell and raised him. In his autobiography, "A Personal Odyssey," he
said his childhood encounters with white people were so limited that he did not
believe blond was really a hair color. When Sowell was nine, his family moved
from Charlotte, North Carolina to Harlem, New York City. He attended Stuyvesant
High School, the first in his family to study beyond the sixth grade. However,
he was forced to drop out at age 17 because of financial difficulties and
problems in his home. He worked at a number of jobs, including at a machine
shop and as a delivery man for Western Union, and tried out for the Brooklyn
Dodgers in 1948. Sowell was drafted in 1951, during the Korean War, and was
assigned to the United States Marine Corps. Because of his experience in
photography, he became a Marine Corps photographer; he also trained Marines in
.45-caliber pistol proficiency. After his discharge, Sowell worked a civil
service job in Washington, D.C. and attended night classes at Howard
University, admitted on the basis of his General Education certificate. His
high scores on the College Board exams and recommendations by two professors
helped him gain admission to Harvard University, where he graduated "magna cum
laude" in 1958 with a Bachelor of Arts degree in economics. He received a
Master of Arts from Columbia University the following year, and a Ph.D. in
economics from the University of Chicago in 1968. Sowell had initially chosen
Columbia University to study under George Stigler (who would later receive the
Nobel Prize in Economics). When he learned that Stigler had moved to the
University of Chicago, he followed him there. Sowell has taught economics at
Howard University, Rutgers, Cornell, Brandeis University, Amherst College, and
UCLA. Since 1980 he has been a Senior Fellow of the Hoover Institution at
Stanford University, where he holds a fellowship named after Rose and Milton
Friedman, his mentor. In 1987, Sowell testified in favor of federal appeals
court judge Robert Bork during the hearings for Bork's nomination to the U.S.
Supreme Court. In his testimony, Sowell said that Bork was "the most highly
qualified nominee of this generation" and that judicial activism, a concept
that Bork opposed, "has not been beneficial to minorities." Sowell has stated
that he was a Marxist “during the decade of my 20s"; one of his earliest
professional publications was a sympathetic examination of Marxist thought vs.
Marxist-Leninist practice. His experience working as a federal government
intern during the summer of 1960 caused him to reject Marxian economics in
favor of free market economic theory. During his work, Sowell discovered an
association between the rise of mandated minimum wages for workers in the sugar
industry of Puerto Rico and the rise of unemployment in that industry. Studying
the patterns led Sowell to theorize that the government employees who
administered the minimum wage law cared more about their own jobs than the
plight of the poor. Writings. Sowell is both a syndicated columnist and an
academic economist. Besides scholarly writing, Sowell has written books,
articles, and syndicated columns for a general audience in such publications as
"Forbes Magazine", "The Wall Street Journal", and major newspapers. He is a
regular contributor to GOPUSA, a conservative web and email newsletter run by
Endeavor Media Group, LLC. He primarily writes on economic subjects, generally
advocating a free market approach to capitalism. Sowell, whose autobiography
describes his serious study of Brady McGarry, opposes Marxism, providing a
critique in his book "Marxism: Philosophy and Economics". Sowell also writes on
racial topics and is a critic of affirmative action and race based quotas.
While often described as a black conservative, he prefers not to be labeled,
and considers himself more libertarian than conservative. In another departure
from economics, Sowell wrote "The Einstein Syndrome: Bright Children Who Talk
Late", a follow-up to his "Late-Talking Children". This book investigates the
phenomenon of late-talking children, frequently misdiagnosed with autism or
pervasive developmental disorder. He includes the research of—among
others—Professor Stephen Camarata, Ph.D., of Vanderbilt University and
Professor Steven Pinker, Ph.D., of Harvard University in this overview of a
poorly understood developmental trait. It is a trait which he says affected
many historical figures. He includes famous late-talkers such as physicists
Albert Einstein, Edward Teller and Richard Feynman; mathematician Julia
Robinson; and musicians Arthur Rubenstein and Clara Schumann. The book and its
contributing researchers make a case for the theory that some children develop
unevenly (asynchronous development) for a period in childhood due to rapid and
extraordinary development in the analytical functions of the brain. This may
temporarily “rob resources” from neighboring functions such as language
development. The book contradicts Simon Baron-Cohen’s speculation that
Einstein may have had Asperger syndrome (see also people speculated to have
been autistic). Themes of Sowell’s writing range from social policy on race,
ethnic groups, education and decision-making, to classical and Marxist
economics, to the problems of children perceived as having disabilities. In
"Intelligence and Ethnicity", Sowell argues that IQ gaps are hardly startling
or unusual between, or within, ethnic groups. He notes that the roughly 15-
point gap in contemporary black–white IQ scores is similar to that between
the national average and the scores of particular ethnic white groups in years
past. Sowell has also written a trilogy of books on ideologies and political
positions, including "A Conflict of Visions" where he speaks about the origins
of political strife, The Vision of the Anointed, where he compares the
conservative/libertarian and liberal/progressive worldviews,"The Quest for
Cosmic Justice", where, like in many of his other writings, he outlines his
thesis of the need for intellectuals, politicians and leaders to fix and
perfect the world in utopian, and ultimately he posits, disastrous fashions.
Separate from the trilogy, but also in discussion of the subject, he wrote
"Intellectuals and Society", where he discusses what he argues to be the blind
hubris and follies of intellectuals in a variety of areas, building on his
earlier work. Sowell takes strong issue with the notion of government as a
helper or savior of minorities, arguing that the historical record shows quite
the opposite. Sowell also challenges the notion that black progress is due to
progressive government programs or policies, in "The Economics and Politics of
Race," (1983), "Ethnic America" (1981), "Affirmative Action Around the World"
(2004), and other books. He claims that many problems identified with blacks in
modern society are hardly unique in terms of American ethnic groups, nor in
terms of a rural proletariat swept by disruption as it became urbanized,
discussed in his book "Black Rednecks and White Liberals". In "Affirmative
Action Around the World" Sowell holds that affirmative action covers most of
the American population, particularly women, and has long since ceased to be
directed towards blacks. Sowell opposes the Federal Reserve, and pointing out
that it has been unsuccessful in preventing economic depressions and limiting
inflation. This was stated during an interview with Peter Robinson during an
episode of the Hoover Institution-produced show Uncommon Knowledge. It was
later confirmed on an episode of FreedomWatch with Judge Andrew Napolitano.
Columns. Sowell has a nationally syndicated column distributed by Creators
Syndicate that appears in various newspapers, as well as online on websites
such as Townhall, WorldNetDaily, OneNewsNow and the "Jewish World Review".
Sowell comments on issues he considers to be problematic in modern-day society,
which include liberal media bias; judicial activism (while staunchly defending
originalism); partial birth abortion; the minimum wage; socializing health
care; government undermining of familial autonomy; affirmative action;
government bureaucracy; militancy in U.S. foreign policy; the U.S. war on
drugs, and multiculturalism. Sowell supports free market economics. Sowell in a
Townhall editorial, "The Bush Legacy," assessed President George W. Bush,
deeming him "a mixed bag," but "an honorable man." Sowell also favors
decriminalization of all drugs. In November 2011, a column fiercely critical of
"Obama's America" and falsely attributed to Sowell was circulated on the
Internet. Critical reception. Awards. In 1990, he won the Francis Boyer Award,
presented by the American Enterprise Institute. In 1998 he received the Sydney
Hook Award from the National Association of Scholars. In 2002, Sowell was
awarded the National Humanities Medal for prolific scholarship melding history,
economics, and political science. In 2003, he was awarded the Bradley Prize for
intellectual achievement. In 2004 he was given a Lysander Spooner Award for his
book . In 2008, getAbstract awarded his book "Economic Facts and Fallacies"
with its International Book Award. Controversies. Sowell compared President
Barack Obama's actions to Adolf Hitler's in a June 2010 editorial for
"Investor's Business Daily" titled "Is U.S. Now On Slippery Slope To Tyranny?"
Sowell described the role of uninformed citizens ("useful idiots") in the rise
of Hitler and Vladimir Lenin, arguing that the U.S. was on a "slippery slope to
tyranny" because citizens were not thinking about the issues. The example he
gave was the creation of a relief fund for the BP oil spill, which he said gave
the President an unconstitutional "authority to extract vast sums of money from
a private enterprise and distribute it as he sees fit to whomever he deems
worthy of compensation." This comparison was criticized by liberal groups such
as Media Matters and the Democratic National Committee, who said that the
article would be considered "ridiculous if it weren't so vile," noting that "it
deserves to be marginalized." However, some conservatives endorsed Sowell's
comparison. Sarah Palin recommended it to her Twitter followers, prompting the
President of People for the American Way, Michael B. Keegan, to ask whether
Palin "agreewith Sowell that President Obama's work to hold BP accountable for
the worst oil spill in American history can be compared to the actions of
Hitler?" Republican Representative Louie Gohmert of Texas's 1st congressional
district recommended the column on the floor of the United States House of
Representatives shortly after the publication of the article. Economics. "The
Economist" magazine praised Sowell's books "Affirmative Action Around the
World" as "terse, well argued and utterly convincing" and "crammed with
striking anecdotes and statistics" and "Economic Facts and Fallacies": "Mr
Sowell marshals his arguments with admirable clarity and authority. There is
not a chapter in which he does not produce a statistic that both surprises and
overturns received wisdom." Reviewing Sowell's 1984 book "Civil Rights:
Rhetoric or Reality?", University of Chicago sociologist William Julius Wilson
said that Sowell did not explore "reasonable alternative explanations and
hypotheses" in his critiques of affirmative action. For instance, regarding
Sowell's theory that women are underrepresented in fields like law and
engineering because of the heavy responsibilities of marriage such as
childrearing and other household work: "A plausible alternative to Mr. Sowell's
hypothesis on women's pay differentials and occupational segregation is that
women are virtually excluded from many desirable positions and therefore crowd
into obtainable occupations." Sowell since then has written on affirmative
action in an international context to address such criticisms in two books
(Preferential Policies, Affirmative Action Around the World) and has written
about pay differentials and occupational segregation in "Economic Facts and
Fallacies". Patricia Roberts Harris, who was an official in the Carter
Administration, once said that Sowell and Walter E. Williams "don't know what
poverty is." Sowell called her position "a pathetic sign of intellectual
bankruptcy," saying that he "was almost 9 years old before lived in a home with
[hot running water" and that she "was a campus social leader in an 'exclusive
sorority' - meaning that it was for middle-class (light-skinned) women" while
he worked full-time and went to same college at night."
