Thomas Hobbes Thomas Hobbes of Malmesbury (5 April 1588 – 4 December 1679),
in some older texts Thomas Hobbs of Malmsbury, was an English philosopher, best
known today for his work on political philosophy. His 1651 book "Leviathan"
established the foundation for most of Western political philosophy from the
perspective of social contract theory. Hobbes was a champion of absolutism for
the sovereign but he also developed some of the fundamentals of European
liberal thought: the right of the individual; the natural equality of all men;
the artificial character of the political order (which led to the later
distinction between civil society and the state); the view that all legitimate
political power must be "representative" and based on the consent of the
people; and a liberal interpretation of law which leaves people free to do
whatever the law does not explicitly forbid. He was one of the founders of
modern political philosophy. His understanding of humans as being matter and
motion, obeying the same physical laws as other matter and motion, remains
influential; and his account of human nature as self-interested cooperation,
and of political communities as being based upon a "social contract" remains
one of the major topics of political philosophy. In addition to political
philosophy, Hobbes also contributed to a diverse array of other fields,
including history, geometry, the physics of gases, theology, ethics, and
general philosophy. Early life and education. Thomas Hobbes was born at
Westport, now part of Malmesbury in Wiltshire, England, on 5 April 1588. Born
prematurely when his mother heard of the coming invasion of the Spanish Armada,
Hobbes later reported that "my mother gave birth to twins: myself and fear."
His childhood is almost a complete blank, and his mother's name is unknown. His
father, also named Thomas, was the vicar of Charlton and Westport. Thomas
Hobbes Sr. had an older brother, Francis Hobbes, who was a wealthy merchant
with no family of his own. Thomas Hobbes, the younger, had one brother Edmund
who was about two years older than him. Thomas Sr. abandoned his wife, two sons
and a daughter, leaving them in the care of his brother, Francis, when he was
forced to flee to London after being involved in a fight with a clergyman
outside his own church. Hobbes was educated at Westport church from the age of
four, passed to the Malmesbury school and then to a private school kept by a
young man named Robert Latimer, a graduate of the University of Oxford. Hobbes
was a good pupil, and around 1603 he went up to Magdalen Hall, which is most
closely related to Hertford College, Oxford. The principal John Wilkinson was a
Puritan, and he had some influence on Hobbes. At university, Hobbes appears to
have followed his own curriculum; he was "little attracted by the scholastic
learning". He did not complete his B.A. degree until 1608, but he was
recommended by Sir James Hussey, his master at Magdalen, as tutor to William,
the son of William Cavendish, Baron of Hardwick (and later Earl of Devonshire),
and began a lifelong connection with that family. Hobbes became a companion to
the younger William and they both took part in a grand tour in 1610. Hobbes was
exposed to European scientific and critical methods during the tour in contrast
to the scholastic philosophy which he had learned in Oxford. His scholarly
efforts at the time were aimed at a careful study of classic Greek and Latin
authors, the outcome of which was, in 1628, his great translation of
Thucydides' "History of the Peloponnesian War", the first translation of that
work into English from a Greek manuscript. It has been argued that three of the
discourses in the 1620 publication known as "Horea Subsecivae: Observations and
Discourses", also represent the work of Hobbes from this period. Although he
associated with literary figures like Ben Jonson and thinkers such as Francis
Bacon, he did not extend his efforts into philosophy until after 1629. His
employer Cavendish, then the Earl of Devonshire, died of the plague in June
1628. The widowed countess dismissed Hobbes but he soon found work, again as a
tutor, this time to Gervase Clifton, the son of Sir Gervase Clifton, 1st
Baronet. This task, chiefly spent in Paris, ended in 1631 when he again found
work with the Cavendish family, tutoring the son of his previous pupil. Over
the next seven years as well as tutoring he expanded his own knowledge of
philosophy, awakening in him curiosity over key philosophic debates. He visited
Florence in 1636 and later was a regular debater in philosophic groups in
Paris, held together by Marin Mersenne. From 1637 he considered himself a
philosopher and scholar. In Paris. 's first area of study was an interest in
the physical doctrine of motion and physical momentum. Despite his interest in
this phenomenon, he disdained experimental work as in physics. He went on to
conceive the system of thought to the elaboration of which he would devote his
life. His scheme was first to work out, in a separate treatise, a systematic
doctrine of body, showing how physical phenomena were universally explicable in
terms of motion, at least as motion or mechanical action was then understood.
He then singled out Man from the realm of Nature and plants. Then, in another
treatise, he showed what specific bodily motions were involved in the
production of the peculiar phenomena of sensation, knowledge, affections and
passions whereby Man came into relation with Man. Finally he considered, in his
crowning treatise, how Men were moved to enter into society, and argued how
this must be regulated if Men were not to fall back into "brutishness and
misery". Thus he proposed to unite the separate phenomena of Body, Man, and the
State. Hobbes came home, in 1637, to a country riven with discontent which
disrupted him from the orderly execution of his philosophic plan. However, by
the end of the Short Parliament in 1640, he had written a short treatise called
"The Elements of Law, Natural and Politic". It was not published and only
circulated among his acquaintances in manuscript form. A pirated version,
however, was published about ten years later. Although it seems that much of
"The Elements of Law" was composed before the sitting of the Short Parliament,
there are polemical pieces of the work that clearly mark the influences of the
rising political crisis. Nevertheless, many (though not all) elements of
Hobbes's political thought were unchanged between "The Elements of Law" and
"Leviathan," which demonstrates that the events of the English Civil War had
little effect on his contractarian methodology. It should be noted, however,
that the arguments in "Leviathan" were modified from "The Elements of Law" when
it came to the necessity of consent in creating political obligation. Namely,
Hobbes wrote in "The Elements of Law" that Patrimonial kingdoms were not
necessarily formed by the consent of the governed, while in "Leviathan" he
argued that they were. This was perhaps a reflection either of Hobbes's
thoughts concerning the engagement controversy or of his reaction to treatises
published by Patriarchalists, such as Sir Robert Filmer, between 1640 and 1651.
When in November 1640 the Long Parliament succeeded the Short, Hobbes felt he
was a marked man by the circulation of his treatise and fled to Paris. He did
not return for eleven years. In Paris he rejoined the coterie about Mersenne,
and wrote a critique of the "Meditations on First Philosophy" of Descartes,
which was printed as third among the sets of "Objections" appended, with
"Replies" from Descartes in 1641. A different set of remarks on other works by
Descartes succeeded only in ending all correspondence between the two. Hobbes
also extended his own works somewhat, working on the third section, "De Cive",
which was finished in November 1641. Although it was initially only circulated
privately, it was well received, and included lines of argumentation to be
repeated a decade later in the "Leviathan". He then returned to hard work on
the first two sections of his work and published little except for a short
treatise on optics ("Tractatus opticus") included in the collection of
scientific tracts published by Mersenne as "Cogitata physico-mathematica" in
1644. He built a good reputation in philosophic circles and in 1645 was chosen
with Descartes, Gilles de Roberval and others, to referee the controversy
between John Pell and Longomontanus over the problem of squaring the circle.
Civil War in England. The English Civil War broke out in 1642, and when the
Royalist cause began to decline in the middle of 1644 there was an exodus of
the king's supporters to Europe. Many came to Paris and were known to Hobbes.
This revitalised Hobbes's political interests and the "De Cive" was republished
and more widely distributed. The printing began in 1646 by Samuel de Sorbiere
through the Elsevier press at Amsterdam with a new preface and some new notes
in reply to objections. In 1647, Hobbes was engaged as mathematical instructor
to the young Charles, Prince of Wales, who had come over from Jersey around
July. This engagement lasted until 1648 when Charles went to Holland. The
company of the exiled royalists led Hobbes to produce an English book to set
forth his theory of civil government in relation to the political crisis
resulting from the war. The State, it now seemed to Hobbes, might be regarded
as a great artificial man or monster ("Leviathan"), composed of men, with a
life that might be traced from its generation under pressure of human needs to
its dissolution through civil strife proceeding from human passions. The work
was closed with a general "Review and Conclusion", in direct response to the
war which raised the question of the subject's right to change allegiance when
a former sovereign's power to protect was irrecoverably gone. He also
criticised religious doctrines on rationalistic grounds in the Commonwealth.
During the years of the composition of "Leviathan" he remained in or near
Paris. In 1647 Hobbes was overtaken by a serious illness which disabled him for
six months. On recovering from this near fatal disorder, he resumed his
literary task, and carried it steadily forward to completion by 1650.
Meanwhile, a translation of "De Cive" was being produced; there has been much
scholarly disagreement over whether Hobbes translated the work himself or not.
In 1650, a pirated edition of "The Elements of Law, Natural and Politic" was
published. It was divided into two separate small volumes ("Human Nature, or
the Fundamental Elements of Policie" and "De corpore politico, or the Elements
of Law, Moral and Politick"). In 1651 the translation of "De Cive" was
published under the title of "Philosophicall Rudiments concerning Government
and Society". Meanwhile, the printing of the greater work was proceeding, and
finally it appeared about the middle of 1651, under the title of "Leviathan, or
the Matter, Forme, and Power of a Common Wealth, Ecclesiasticall and Civil",
with a famous title-page engraving in which, from behind hills overlooking a
landscape, there towered the body (above the waist) of a crowned giant, made up
of tiny figures of human beings and bearing sword and crozier in the two hands.
The work had immediate impact. Soon Hobbes was more lauded and decried than any
other thinker of his time. However, the first effect of its publication was to
sever his link with the exiled royalists, forcing him to appeal to the
revolutionary English government for protection. The exiles might very well
have killed him; the secularist spirit of his book greatly angered both
Anglicans and French Catholics. Hobbes fled back home, arriving in London in
the winter of 1651. Following his submission to the council of state he was
allowed to subside into private life in Fetter Lane. "Leviathan". In
"Leviathan", Hobbes set out his doctrine of the foundation of states and
legitimate governments – originating social contract theory. "Leviathan" was
written during the English Civil War; much of the book is occupied with
demonstrating the necessity of a strong central authority to avoid the evil of
discord and civil war. In such a state, people fear death, and lack both the
things necessary to living, and the hope of being able to toil to obtain them.
So in order to avoid it people accede to a social contract and establish a
civil society. According to Hobbes, society is a population beneath a sovereign
authority, to whom all individuals in that society cede some rights for the
sake of protection. Any abuses of power by this authority are to be accepted as
the price of peace. There is no doctrine of separation of powers in Hobbes's
discussion. According to Hobbes, the sovereign must control civil, military,
judicial, and ecclesiastical powers. Opposition. John Bramhall. Hobbes now
turned to complete the fundamental treatise of his philosophical system. He
worked so steadily that "De Corpore" was first printed in 1654. Also in 1654, a
small treatise, "Of Liberty and Necessity", was published by Bishop John
Bramhall, addressed at Hobbes. Bramhall, a strong Arminian, had met and debated
with Hobbes and afterwards wrote down his views and sent them privately to be
answered in this form by Hobbes. Hobbes duly replied, but not for publication.
But a French acquaintance took a copy of the reply and published it with "an
extravagantly laudatory epistle." Bramhall countered in 1655, when he printed
everything that had passed between them (under the title of "A Defence of the
True Liberty of Human Actions from Antecedent or Extrinsic Necessity"). In 1656
Hobbes was ready with "The Questions concerning Liberty, Necessity and Chance",
in which he replied "with astonishing force" to the bishop. As perhaps the
first clear exposition of the psychological doctrine of determinism, Hobbes's
own two pieces were important in the history of the free-will controversy. The
bishop returned to the charge in 1658 with "Castigations of Mr Hobbes's
Animadversions", and also included a bulky appendix entitled "The Catching of
Leviathan the Great Whale". John Wallis. Beyond the spat with Bramhall, Hobbes
was caught in a series of conflicts from the time of publishing his "De
Corpore" in 1655. In "Leviathan" he had assailed the system of the original
universities. Because Hobbes was so evidently opposed to the existing academic
arrangements, and because "De Corpore" contained not only tendentious views on
mathematics, but an unacceptable proof of the squaring of the circle (which was
apparently an afterthought), mathematicians took him to be a target for
polemics. John Wallis was not the first such opponent, but he tenaciously
pursued Hobbes. The resulting controversy continued well into the 1670s.
Atheism. Hobbes has been accused of atheism, or (in the case of Bramhall) of
teachings which could lead to atheism. This was an important accusation, and
Hobbes himself wrote, in his answer to Bramhall's "the catching of the
Leviathan" that "atheism, impiety, and the like are words of the greatest
defamation possible". Hobbes always defended himself from such accusations. In
more recent times also, much has been made of his religious views by scholars
such as Richard Tuck and J. G. A. Pocock, but there is still widespread
disagreement about the exact significance of Hobbes's unusual views on
religion. As has pointed out, in Hobbes's time, the term "atheist" was
frequently applied to people who believed in God, but not divine providence, or
to people who believed in God, but also maintained other beliefs which were
inconsistent with such belief. He says that this "sort of discrepancy has led
to many errors in determining who was an atheist in the early modern period".
In this extended early modern sense of atheism, Hobbes did indeed take
positions which were in strong disagreement with church teachings of his time.
For example, Hobbes argued repeatedly that there are no incorporeal substances,
and that all things, including human thoughts, and even God, heaven, and hell
are corporeal, matter in motion. He argued that "though Scripture acknowledge
spirits, yet doth it nowhere say, that they are incorporeal, meaning thereby
without dimensions and quantity". (In this view, Hobbes claimed to be following
Tertullian, whose views were not condemned in the Nicene creed.) He also, like
Locke, stated that true revelation can never be in disagreement with human
reason and experience, although he also argues that people should accept
revelation and its interpretations also for the reason that they should accept
the commands of their sovereign, in order to avoid war. Later life. In 1658,
Hobbes published the final section of his philosophical system, completing the
scheme he had planned more than twenty years before. "De Homine" consisted for
the most part of an elaborate theory of vision. The remainder of the treatise
dealt cursorily with some of the topics more fully treated in the "Human
Nature" and the "Leviathan". In addition to publishing some controversial
writings on mathematics and physics, Hobbes also continued to produce
philosophical works. From the time of the Restoration he acquired a new
prominence; "Hobbism" became a byword for all that respectable society ought to
denounce. The young king, Hobbes's former pupil, now Charles II, remembered
Hobbes and called him to the court to grant him a pension of £100. The king
was important in protecting Hobbes when, in 1666, the House of Commons
introduced a bill against atheism and profaneness. That same year, on 17
October 1666, it was ordered that the committee to which the bill was referred
"should be empowered to receive information touching such books as tend to
atheism, blasphemy and profaneness... in particular... the book of Mr. Hobbes
called the "Leviathan"". Hobbes was terrified at the prospect of being labelled
a heretic, and proceeded to burn some of his compromising papers. At the same
time, he examined the actual state of the law of heresy. The results of his
investigation were first announced in three short Dialogues added as an
"Appendix" to his "Latin translation of Leviathan", published at Amsterdam in
1668. In this appendix, Hobbes aimed to show that, since the High Court of
Commission had been put down, there remained no court of heresy at all to which
he was amenable, and that nothing could be heresy except opposing the Nicene
Creed, which, he maintained, "Leviathan" did not do. The only consequence that
came of the bill was that Hobbes could never thereafter publish anything in
England on subjects relating to human conduct. The 1668 edition of his works
was printed in Amsterdam because he could not obtain the censor's licence for
its publication in England. Other writings were not made public until after his
death, including "Behemoth: the History of the Causes of the Civil Wars of
England and of the Counsels and Artifices by which they were carried on from
the year 1640 to the year 1662". For some time, Hobbes was not even allowed to
respond, whatever his enemies tried. Despite this, his reputation abroad was
formidable, and noble or learned foreigners who came to England never forgot to
pay their respects to the old philosopher. His final works were a curious
mixture: an autobiography in Latin verse in 1672, and a translation of four
books of the "Odyssey" into "rugged" English rhymes that in 1673 led to a
complete translation of both "Iliad" and "Odyssey" in 1675. In October 1679,
Hobbes suffered a bladder disorder, which was followed by a paralytic stroke
from which he died on 4 December 1679. He is said to have uttered the last
words "A great leap in the dark" in his final moments of life. He was interred
within St. John the Baptist Church in Ault Hucknall in Derbyshire, England.
