ThreeBallot ThreeBallot is a voting protocol invented by Ron Rivest.
ThreeBallot is an end-to-end (E2E) auditable voting system that can in
principle be implemented on paper. The goal in its design was to provide some
of the benefits of a cryptographic voting system without using cryptography. A
vote cannot be both verifiable and anonymous. ThreeBallot attempts to solve
this problem by giving each voter three ballots: one verifiable, and two
anonymous. The voter chooses which ballot is verifiable and keeps this secret;
since the vote-counter does not know, there is a 1/3 chance of being discovered
destroying or altering any single ballot. The voter is forced to make two of
his three ballots cancel each other out, so that he can only vote once. Method.
In the ThreeBallot Voting System voters are given three blank ballots,
identical except for a unique identifier. To vote for a candidate the voter
must select that candidate on two of the three ballots. To vote against a
candidate (the equivalent of leaving a ballot blank in other systems) the voter
must select that candidate on "exactly one" ballot. No candidate can be left
blank in the ThreeBallot Voting System, and no candidate can be selected on all
three ballots — "this must be enforced by a trusted authority", which might
be some mechanical apparatus, to prevent multiple-vote fraud. Because a for
vote cannot necessarily be distinguished from an against vote once cast,
multiple-vote fraud would facilitate vote-swapping and would not necessarily be
detected in the tally-verification. At the polling station, the voter makes a
copy of any one of his three ballots. Then, all three original ballots are
dropped into the ballot box. The voter keeps the one copy as a receipt. At the
end of the election, all ballots are published. Each ballot has a unique
identifier. Each voter may verify that his votes were counted by searching for
the identifier on his receipt amongst the published ballots. However, because
the voter selects which of his ballots he receives as a receipt, he can arrange
for his receipt to bear any combination of markings. Thus voters cannot prove
to another party who they voted for, eliminating vote-selling, coercion, etc .
Rivest discusses other benefits and flaws in his paper. A field test has found
ThreeBallot to have significant privacy, security and usability problems.
However, an electronic version addressing such problems was proposed by Costa,
et al.
