Vote splitting Vote splitting is an electoral effect in which the distribution
of votes among multiple similar candidates reduces the chance of winning for
any of the similar candidates, and increases the chance of winning for a
dissimilar candidate. Vote splitting most easily occurs in plurality voting
(also called first-past-the-post) in which each voter indicates a single choice
and the candidate with the most votes wins, even if the winner does not have
majority support. For example, if candidate A1 receives 30% of the votes,
similar candidate A2 receives another 30% of the votes, and dissimilar
candidate B receives the remaining 40% of the votes, plurality voting declares
candidate B as the winner, even though 60% of the voters prefer either
candidate A1 or A2. Runoff voting methods are less vulnerable to vote splitting
compared to plurality voting. Pairwise-counting Condorcet methods minimize vote
splitting effects. A well-known effect of vote splitting is the spoiler effect,
in which a popular candidate loses an election by a small margin because a
less-popular similar candidate attracts votes away from the popular candidate,
allowing a dissimilar candidate to win. Strategic nomination takes advantage of
vote splitting to defeat a popular candidate by supporting another similar
candidate. Vote splitting is one possible cause for an electoral system failing
the independence of clones or independence of irrelevant alternatives fairness
criteria. Vote splitting and electoral systems. Different electoral systems
have different levels of vulnerability to vote splitting. Vote splitting most
easily occurs in plurality voting because ranked ballots are not used, so there
is no information about the secondary preferences of the voters. Approval
voting reduces the vote-splitting effect compared to plurality voting, but vote
splitting still occurs because the full preferences of voters are not
collected. Runoff voting is less vulnerable to vote splitting, yet vote
splitting can occur in any round of runoff voting. Although instant runoff
voting (IRV) uses ranked ballots, secondary preferences are considered in the
same sequence as in multiple rounds of voting, so this method does not reduce
the vote-splitting effect (compared to runoff voting). Vote splitting rarely
occurs when the chosen electoral system uses ranked ballots and a pairwise-
counting method, such as a Condorcet method. Vote splitting rarely occurs when
using pairwise counting methods because they do not involve distributing each
voter's vote among the candidates. Instead, pairwise counting methods
separately consider each possible pair of candidates, for all possible pairs.
For each pair of candidates there is a count for how many voters prefer the
first candidate (in the pair) to the second candidate, and how many voters have
the opposite preference. The resulting table of pairwise counts eliminates the
step-by-step distribution of votes that facilitates vote splitting in other
voting methods. When ranked ballots are used, a voter can vote for a minor
party candidate as their first choice, and also indicate their order of
preference for the remaining candidates, without regard for whether a candidate
is in a major political party. For example, voters who support a very liberal
candidate can select a somewhat liberal candidate as their second choice, thus
minimising the chance that their vote will result in the election of a
conservative candidate. Voting methods that are vulnerable to strategic
nomination, especially methods that fail independence of clones, are vulnerable
to vote splitting. Vote splitting also can occur in situations that do not
involve strategic nomination, such as talent contests (such as American Idol)
where earlier rounds of voting determine the current contestants. In the United
States vote splitting commonly occurs in primary elections. The purpose of
primary elections is to eliminate vote splitting among candidates in the same
party. If primary elections or party nominations are not used to identify a
single candidate from each party, the party that has more candidates is more
likely to lose because of vote splitting among the candidates from the same
party. Primary elections only occur within each party, so vote splitting can
still occur between parties in the secondary election. In addition to applying
to single-winner voting systems (such as used in the United Kingdom, the United
States and Canada), a split vote can occur in proportional representation
methods that use election thresholds, such as in Germany, New Zealand and
Turkey. In these cases, "fringe" parties that do not meet the threshold can
take away votes from larger parties with similar ideologies.
