Thucydides Thucydides (; Greek: Θουκυδίδης, "Thoukydídēs"; c. 460
– c. 395 BC) was a Greek historian and author from Alimos. His "History of
the Peloponnesian War" recounts the 5th century BC war between Sparta and
Athens to the year 411 BC. Thucydides has been dubbed the father of "scientific
history", because of his strict standards of evidence-gathering and analysis in
terms of cause and effect without reference to intervention by the gods, as
outlined in his introduction to his work. He has also been called the father of
the school of political realism, which views the relations between nations as
based on might rather than right. His text is still studied at advanced
military colleges worldwide, and the Melian dialogue remains a seminal work of
international relations theory. More generally, Thucydides showed an interest
in developing an understanding of human nature to explain behaviour in such
crises as plague, massacres, as in that of the Melians, and civil war. Life. In
spite of his stature as a historian, modern historians know relatively little
about Thucydides' life. The most reliable information comes from his own
"History of the Peloponnesian War", which expounds his nationality, paternity
and native locality. Thucydides informs us that he fought in the war,
contracted the plague and was exiled by the democracy. He may have also been
involved in quelling the Samian Revolt. Evidence from the Classical Period.
Thucydides identifies himself as an Athenian, telling us that his father's name
was Olorus and that he was from the Athenian deme of Halimous. He survived the
Plague of Athens that killed Pericles and many other Athenians. He also records
that he owned gold mines at Scapte Hyle (literally: "Dug Woodland"), a coastal
area in Thrace, opposite the island of Thasos. Because of his influence in the
Thracian region, Thucydides wrote, he was sent as a strategos (general) to
Thasos in 424 BC. During the winter of 424-423 BC, the Spartan general Brasidas
attacked Amphipolis, a half-day's sail west from Thasos on the Thracian coast,
instigating the Battle of Amphipolis. Eucles, the Athenian commander at
Amphipolis, sent to Thucydides for help. Brasidas, aware of Thucydides'
presence on Thasos and his influence with the people of Amphipolis, and afraid
of help arriving by sea, acted quickly to offer moderate terms to the
Amphipolitans for their surrender, which they accepted. Thus, when Thucydides
arrived, Amphipolis was already under Spartan control. Using his status as an
exile from Athens to travel freely among the Peloponnesian allies, he was able
to view the war from the perspective of both sides. During this time, he
conducted important research for his history, having claimed that he pursued
the project as he thought it would be one of the greatest wars waged among the
Greeks in terms of scale. This is all that Thucydides wrote about his own life,
but a few other facts are available from reliable contemporary sources.
Herodotus wrote that Thucydides' father's name, "Όloros", was connected with
Thrace and Thracian royalty. Thucydides was probably connected through family
to the Athenian statesman and general Miltiades, and his son Cimon, leaders of
the old aristocracy supplanted by the Radical Democrats. Cimon's maternal
grandfather's name was also Olorus, making the connection exceedingly likely.
Another Thucydides lived before the historian and was also linked with Thrace,
making a family connection between them very likely as well. Finally, Herodotus
confirms the connection of Thucydides' family with the mines at Scapté Hýlē.
Combining all the fragmentary evidence available, it seems that his family had
owned a large estate in Thrace, one that even contained gold mines, and which
allowed the family considerable and lasting affluence. The security and
continued prosperity of the wealthy estate must have necessitated formal ties
with local kings or chieftains, which explains the adoption of the distinctly
Thracian royal name ""Όloros"" into the family. Once exiled, Thucydides took
permanent residence in the estate and, given his ample income from the gold
mines, he was able to dedicate himself to full-time history writing and
research, including many fact-finding trips. In essence, he was a retired and
well-connected gentleman of considerable resources who, by then retired from
the political and military spheres, decided to fund his own historical project.
Later sources. The remaining evidence for Thucydides' life comes from rather
less reliable later ancient sources. According to Pausanias, someone named
Oenobius was able to get a law passed allowing Thucydides to return to Athens,
presumably sometime shortly after the city's surrender and the end of the war
in 404 BC. Pausanias goes on to say that Thucydides was murdered on his way
back to Athens. Many doubt this account, seeing evidence to suggest he lived as
late as 397 BC. Plutarch claims that his remains were returned to Athens and
placed in Cimon's family vault. The abrupt end to Thucydides' narrative, which
breaks off in the middle of the year 411 BC, has traditionally been interpreted
as indicating that he died while writing the book, although other explanations
have been put forward. Inferences about Thucydides' character can only be drawn
(with due caution) from his book. His sardonic sense of humour is evident
throughout, as when, during his description of the Athenian plague, he remarks
that old Athenians seemed to remember a rhyme which said that with the Dorian
War would come a "great death". Some claimed that the rhyme was actually about
a "great dearth" ("limos"), and was only remembered as "death" ("loimos") due
to the current plague. Thucydides then remarks that should another Dorian War
come, this time attended with a great dearth, the rhyme will be remembered as
"dearth," and any mention of "death" forgotten. Thucydides admired Pericles,
approving of his power over the people and showing a marked distaste for the
demagogues who followed him. He did not approve of the democratic mob nor the
radical democracy that Pericles ushered in but considered democracy acceptable
when guided by a good leader. Thucydides' presentation of events is generally
even-handed; for example, he does not minimize the negative effect of his own
failure at Amphipolis. Occasionally, however, strong passions break through, as
in his scathing appraisals of the demagogues Cleon; and Hyperbolus. Cleon has
sometimes been connected with Thucydides' exile. That Thucydides was clearly
moved by the suffering inherent in war and concerned about the excesses to
which human nature is prone in such circumstances is evident in his analysis of
the atrocities committed during civil conflict on Corcyra, which includes the
phrase "War is a violent teacher". The History of the Peloponnesian War. After
his death, Thucydides' history was subdivided into eight books: its modern
title is the "History of the Peloponnesian War". His great contribution to
history and historiography is contained in this one dense history of the 27-
year war between Athens and Sparta, each with their respective allies. The
history breaks off near the end of the 21st year; the last sketchy book
suggests that his death was unexpected. Thucydides believed that the
Peloponnesian War represented an event of unmatched magnitude. His intention
was to write an account of the events of the late fifth century which would
serve as "a possession for all time". Thucydides is generally regarded as one
of the first true historians. Like his predecessor Herodotus, known as "the
father of history", Thucydides places a high value on eyewitness testimony and
writes about events in which he himself probably took part. He also assiduously
consulted written documents and interviewed participants about the events that
he recorded. Unlike Herodotus, whose stories often teach that a foolish
arrogance—hubris—invites the wrath of the gods, Thucydides does not
acknowledge divine intervention in human affairs. Thucydides omits discussion
of the arts, literature or the social milieu in which the events in his book
take place and in which he himself grew up. He saw himself as recording an
event, not a period, and went to considerable lengths to exclude what he deemed
frivolous or extraneous. Critical interpretation. Scholars traditionally view
Thucydides as recognizing and teaching the lesson that democracies need
leadership, but that leadership can be dangerous to democracy. Leo Strauss (in
"The City and Man") locates the problem in the nature of Athenian democracy
itself, about which, he argued, Thucydides had a deeply ambivalent view: on one
hand, Thucydides' own "wisdom was made possible" by the Periclean democracy,
which had the effect of liberating individual daring, enterprise and
questioning spirit, but this same liberation, by permitting the growth of
limitless political ambition, led to imperialism and, eventually, civic strife.
For Canadian historian Charles Norris Cochrane (1889–1945), Thucydides'
fastidious devotion to observable phenomena, focus on cause and effect, and
strict exclusion of other factors anticipates twentieth century scientific
positivism. Cochrane, the son of a physician, speculated that Thucydides
generally (and especially in describing the plague in Athens) was influenced by
the methods and thinking of early medical writers such as Hippocrates of Kos.
After World War II, Classical scholar Jacqueline de Romilly pointed out that
the problem of Athenian imperialism was one of Thucydides' central
preoccupations and situated his history in the context of Greek thinking about
international politics. Since the appearance of her study, other scholars
further examined Thucydides' treatment of "realpolitik". More recently,
scholars have questioned the perception of Thucydides as simply "the father of
realpolitik". Instead they have brought to the fore the literary qualities of
the "History", which they see as belonging to narrative tradition of Homer and
Hesiod and as concerned with the concepts of justice and suffering found in
Plato and Aristotle and problematized in Aeschylus and Sophocles. Richard Ned
Lebow terms Thucydides "the last of the tragedians", stating that "Thucydides
drew heavily on epic poetry and tragedy to construct his history, which not
surprisingly is also constructed as a narrative." In this view, the blind and
immoderate behaviour of the Athenians (and indeed of all the other actors),
though perhaps intrinsic to human nature, ultimately leads to their downfall.
Thus his "History" could serve as a warning to future leaders to be more
prudent, by putting them on notice that someone would be scrutinizing their
actions with a historian's objectivity rather than a chronicler's flattery.
Finally, the question has recently been raised as to whether Thucydides was not
greatly, if not fundamentally, concerned with the matter of religion. Contrary
to Herodotus, who portrays the gods as active agents in human affairs,
Thucydides attributes the existence of the divine entirely to the needs of
political life. The gods are seen as existing only in the minds of men.
Religion as such reveals itself in the "History" to be not simply one type of
social behaviour among others, but what permeates the whole of social
existence, permitting the emergence of justice. Thucydides versus Herodotus.
Herodotus records in his "Histories" not only the events of the Persian Wars
but also geographical and ethnographical information, as well as the fables
related to him during his extensive travels. Typically, he passes no definitive
judgment on what he has heard. In the case of conflicting or unlikely accounts,
he presents both sides, says what he believes and then invites readers to
decide for themselves. The work of Herodotus is reported to have been recited
at festivals, where prizes were awarded, as for example, during the games at
Olympia. Herodotus views history as a source of moral lessons, with conflicts
and wars as misfortunes flowing from initial acts of injustice perpetuated
through cycles of revenge. In contrast, Thucydides claims to confine himself to
factual reports of contemporary political and military events, based on
unambiguous, first-hand, eye-witness accounts, although, unlike Herodotus, he
does not reveal his sources. Thucydides views life exclusively as "political"
life, and history in terms of "political" history. Conventional moral
considerations play no role in his analysis of political events while
geographic and ethnographic aspects are omitted or, at best, of secondary
importance. Subsequent Greek historians — such as Ctesias, Diodorus, Strabo,
Polybius and Plutarch — held up Thucydides' writings as a model of truthful
history. Lucian refers to Thucydides as having given Greek historians their
"law", requiring them to say "what had been done" (). Greek historians of the
fourth century BC accepted that history was political and that contemporary
history was the proper domain of a historian. Cicero calls Herodotus the
"father of history;" yet the Greek writer Plutarch, in his Moralia (Ethics)
denigrated Herodotus, as the "father of lies". Unlike Thucydides, however,
these historians all continued to view history as a source of moral lessons.
Due to the loss of the ability to read Greek, Thucydides and Herodotus were
largely forgotten during the Middle Ages in Western Europe, although their
influence continued in the Byzantine world. In Europe, Herodotus become known
and highly respected only in the late-sixteenth and early-seventeenth century
as an ethnographer, in part due to the discovery of America, where customs and
animals were encountered even more surprising than what he had related. During
the Reformation, moreover, information about Middle Eastern countries in the
"Histories" provided a basis for establishing Biblical chronology as advocated
by Isaac Newton. The first European translation of Thucydides (into Latin) was
made by the humanist Lorenzo Valla between 1448 and 1452, and the first Greek
edition was published by Aldo Manunzio in 1502. During the Renaissance,
however, Thucydides attracted less interest among Western European historians
as a political philosopher than his successor, Polybius, although Poggio
Bracciolini claimed to have been influenced by him. There is not much trace of
Thucydides' influence in Niccolò Machiavelli's "The Prince" (1513), which held
that the chief aim of a new prince must be to "maintain his state" his power
and that in so doing he is often compelled to act against faith, humanity and
religion. Later historians, such as J. B. Bury, however, have noted parallels
between them:J. B. Bury, "The Ancient Greek Historians" (London, MacMillan,
1909), pp. 140-143.In the seventeenth century, the English political
philosopher Thomas Hobbes, whose "Leviathan" advocated absolute monarchy,
admired Thucydides and in 1628 was the first to translate his writings into
English directly from Greek. Thucydides, Hobbes and Machiavelli are together
considered the founding fathers of political realism, according to which state
policy must primarily or solely focus on the need to maintain military and
economic power rather than on ideals or ethics. Nineteenth-century positivist
historians stressed what they saw as Thucydides' seriousness, his scientific
objectivity and his advanced handling of evidence. A virtual cult following
developed among such German philosophers as Friedrich Schelling, Friedrich
Schlegel and Friedrich Nietzsche, who claimed that, "Thucydides, the portrayer
of man, that culture of the most impartial knowledge of the world finds its
last glorious flower." For Eduard Meyer, Macaulay and Leopold von Ranke, who
initiated modern source-based history writing, Thucydides was again the model
historian. (Green 2008, op cit) These historians also admired Herodotus,
however, as social and ethnographic history increasingly came to be recognized
as complementary to political history. In the twentieth century, this trend
gave rise to the works of Johan Huizinga, Marc Bloch and Braudel, who pioneered
the study of long-term cultural and economic developments and the patterns of
everyday life. The Annales School, which exemplifies this direction, has been
viewed as extending the tradition of Herodotus. At the same time, Thucydides'
influence was increasingly important in the area of international relations
during the Cold War, through the work of Hans Morgenthau, Leo Strauss and
Edward Carr. "Arms and the Man: What was Herodotus trying to tell us?" ("The
New Yorker", April 28, 2008) Another author, Thomas Geoghegan, whose speciality
is labour rights, comes down on the side of Herodotus when it comes to drawing
lessons relevant to Americans, who, he notes, tend to be rather isolationist in
their habits (if not in their political theorizing): "We should also spend more
funds to get our young people out of the library where they're reading
Thucydides and get them to start living like Herodotus — going out and seeing
the world." Thucydides in popular culture. In 1991, the BBC broadcast a new
version of John Barton's 'The War that Never Ends', which had first been
performed on stage in the 1960s. This adapts Thucydides' text, together with
short sections from Plato's dialogues. Quotations about Thucydides. And after
time of Herodotus, Thucydides, in my opinion, easily vanquished all in the
artfulness of his style: he so concentrates his copious material that he almost
matches the number of his words with the number of his thoughts. In his words,
further, he is so apposite and compressed that you do not know whether his
matter is being illuminated by his diction or his words by his thoughts.
(Cicero,"De Oratore" 2.56 (55 B.C.)) In the preface to his 1628 translation of
Thucydides, entitled, "Eight Bookes of the Peloponesian Warres", political
philosopher Thomas Hobbes calls Thucydides "the most politic historiographer
that ever writ." "Exiled Thucydides knew "All that a speech can say "About
Democracy, "And what dictators do, "The elderly rubbish they talk "To an
apathetic grave; "Analysed all in his book, "The enlightenment driven away,
"The habit-forming pain, "We must suffer them all again."
