Ticket (election) A ticket refers to a single election choice which fills more
than one political office or seat. For example, in the U.S., the candidates for
President and Vice President run on the same "ticket", because they are elected
together on a single ballot question rather than separately. A ticket can also
refer to a political party. In this case, the candidates for a given party are
said to be running on the party's ticket. "Straight party voting" (most common
in some U.S. states) is voting for the entire party ticket, including every
office for which the party has a candidate running. Particularly in the era of
mechanical voting machines, it was possible to accomplish this in many
jurisdictions by the use of a "party lever" which automatically cast a vote for
each member of the party by the activation of a single lever. Ticket Splitters
are people who vote for candidates from more than one political party when they
vote for public offices, voting on the basis of individual personalities and
records instead of on the basis of party loyalties. While a ticket usually does
refer to a political party, they are not legally the same. In rare cases,
members of a political party can run against their party's official candidate
by running with a rival party's ticket label or creating a new ticket under an
independent or ad-hoc party label depending on the jurisdiction's election
laws. Depending on the party's rules, these rogue members may retain the
membership of their original party thus two individuals from one political
party can run oppose to each other under different tickets. This was the case
for incumbent Senator Joseph Lieberman who ran against his Democratic Party's
official candidate for re-election in 2006. Political party factions may also
sponsor tickets in primary elections. When that occurs, several candidates,
usually one for each office for which the party's nomination is being contested
in the primary, endorse one another and may make joint appearances and share
advertising with the goal of securing the party's nomination for the office
each is seeking for all ticket members. This system was frequently seen in the
"Solid South" era in the Southern United States when there was no effective two
party system and victory in the Democratic Party primary was considered to be
"tantamount to election".
