Time-based currency In economics, a time-based currency is an alternative
currency where the unit of exchange is the man-hour. Some time-based currencies
value everyone’s contributions equally. One hour equals one service credit.
In these systems, one person volunteers to work for an hour for another person;
thus, they are credited with one hour, which they can redeem for an hour of
service from another volunteer. Critics charge this would lead to fewer doctors
or dentists. Other systems, such as Ithaca Hours, let doctors and dentists
charge more hours per hour. Time Dollars. Time Dollars are created via mutual
credit: Each transaction is recorded as a corresponding credit and debit in the
accounts of the participants. In a Time Dollars system, or Time Bank, each
participant's time is valued equally, whether he/she is a novice or an
extensively trained expert. Time Dollars thus recognize and encourage
reciprocal community service, resist inflation without encouraging hoarding,
and are in sufficient supply, which enables trade and cooperation among
participants. It has been implemented in a wide variety of settings – rural
Appalachia, urban St. Louis, in Youth Court, and in retirement communities, to
name a few. Time banks. Edgar Cahn came up with Time Dollars as "a new currency
to provide a solution to massive cuts in government spending on social welfare.
If there was not going to be enough of the old money to fix all the problems
facing our country and our society", Edgar argued, "Why not make a new kind of
money to pay people for what needs to be done? Time Dollars value everyone’s
contributions equally. One hour equals one service credit." Cahn wrote two
books, "Our Brother’s Keeper" and "No More Throw-Away People". The concept
has had several historical antecedents, the most notable of which was the
National Equitable Labour Exchange, which was founded in London, England in
1832 by Welsh socialist and labor reformer Robert Owen, and spread to several
branches, most notably Birmingham, England before folding in 1834. This
exchange issued "Labour Notes" similar to banknotes, denominated in units of 1,
2, 5, 10, 20, 40 and 80 hours. John Gray, a socialist economist, worked with
Owen, and later with Ricardian Socialists and postulated a "National Chamber of
Commerce" as a central bank issuing a "labour currency". In 1848, socialist and
the first person to call himself an anarchist, Pierre-Joseph Proudhon
postulated a system of "time chits". In 1875, Karl Marx wrote of "Labor
Certificates" (Arbeitszertifikaten) in his Critique of the Gotha Program of a
"certificate from society that labourer has furnished such and such an amount
of labour", which can be used to draw "from the social stock of means of
consumption as much as costs the same amount of labour." The largest and most
active Time Bank in the United States is the Dane County TimeBank in Madison,
Wisconsin with over 1,000 members, a Youth Court and connections to Community
Supported Agriculture. The Dane County TimeBank co-hosted "TimeBanking in
Action," the TimeBanking International Conference in 2007, and will be co-
hosting the TimeBanking Conference, "Time For Justice, A Wealth of Opportunity"
in June 2009. TimeBanks USA is the hub of a nationwide network of TimeBanks
offering training and support to timebanks around the country. It developed
Community Weaver software now widely used with over 11,000 participants. In the
US there are now 101 TimeBanks listed on http://community.timebanks.org/
findtimebanks.php. TimeBanking has spread to over 37 nations and six
continents. In England, Scotland, Wales and Ireland, TimeBanking has spread
rapidly. In Wales there has been a particular focus on the development of
'Agency Timebanks' to engage local people as contributors to public service and
community Agency Timebanking in Wales There are 116 in operation and another 87
under development; the government and national volunteer organizations have
been particularly supportive. They are promoted as a tool in community
regeneration. Criticisms. Some criticisms of Time Banking have focused on the
Time Dollar's inadequacies as a form of currency and as a market information
mechanism. Frank Fisher of MIT predicted in the 80s that such a currency "would
lead to the kind of distortion of market forces which had crippled Russia's
economy." To this day, Time Banks in the U.S. must avoid setting any monetary
worth on their Time Dollars, lest it become taxable income to the IRS. Dr. Gill
Seyfang's study of the Gorbals Time Bank—one of the few studies of Time
Banking done by the academic community—listed several other non-theoretical
problems with Time Banking. The first is the difficulty of communicating to
potential members exactly what makes Time Banking different, or "getting people
to understand the difference between Time Banking and traditional
volunteering." She also notes that there is no guarantee that every person's
needs will be provided for by a Time Bank by dint of the fact that the supply
of certain skills may be lacking in a community. One of the most stringent
criticisms of Time Banking is its organizational sustainability. While some
member-run Time Banks with relatively low overhead costs do exist, others pay a
staff to keep the organization running. This can be quite expensive for smaller
organizations and without a long-term source of funding, they may fold.
