Time preference In economics, time preference (or "discounting") is the
valuation consumers place on consumption nearer in time versus more remote
consumption. There is no absolute distinction that separates "high" and "low"
time preference, only comparisons with others either individually or in
aggregate. Someone with a high time preference is focused substantially on his
well-being in the present and the immediate future relative to the average
person, while someone with low time preference places more emphasis than
average on their well-being in the further future. Time preferences are
captured mathematically in the discount function. The higher the time
preference, the higher the discount placed on returns receivable or costs
payable in the future. The time preference that an individual exhibits at any
given moment is determined solely by their personal preferences. As such, if
one "prefers" to save his money but cannot do so in the present, he is still
considered to have a low time-preference. One of the factors that may determine
an individual's time preference is how long that individual has lived. An older
individual may have a lower time preference (relative to what he had earlier in
life) due to a higher income and to the fact that he has had more time to
acquire durable commodities (such as a college education or a house). The time
preference theory of interest is an attempt to explain interest through the
demand for accelerated satisfaction. This is particularly important in
microeconomics. In the neoclassical theory of interest due to Irving Fisher,
the interest rate determines the relative price of present and future
consumption. Time preference, in conjunction with relative levels of present
and future consumption, determines the marginal rate of substitution between
present and future consumption. These two rates must necessarily be equal, and
this equilibrium is brought about by the relative prices of present and future
consumption. Neoclassical views. In neoclassical economics, the rate of time
preference is usually taken as a parameter in an individual's utility function
which captures the trade off between consumption today and consumption in the
future, and is thus exogenous and subjective. It is also the underlying
determinant of the real rate of interest. The rate of return on investment is
generally seen as return on capital, with the real rate of interest equal to
the marginal product of capital at any point in time. Arbitrage, in turn,
implies that the return on capital is equalized with the interest rate on
financial assets (adjusting for factors such as inflation and risk). Consumers,
who are facing a choice between consumption and saving, respond to the
difference between the market interest rate and their own subjective rate of
time preference ("impatience") and increase or decrease their current
consumption according to this difference. This changes the amount of funds
available for investment and capital accumulation, as in for example the Ramsey
growth model. In the long run steady state, consumption's share in a person's
income is constant, which pins down the rate of interest as equal to the rate
of time preference, with the marginal product of capital adjusting to ensure
this equality holds. It is important to note that in this view, it is not that
people discount the future because they can receive positive interest rates on
their savings. Rather, the causality goes in the opposite direction; interest
rates must be positive in order to induce impatient individuals to forgo
current consumptions in favor of future. Austrian School views. The Austrian
School sees time as the root of uncertainty within economics. In his book
"Capital and Interest", the Austrian economist Eugen von Böhm-Bawerk built
upon the time-preference ideas of Carl Menger, insisting that there is always a
difference in value between present goods and future goods of equal quality,
quantity, and form. Furthermore, the value of future goods diminishes as the
length of time necessary for their completion increases. Böhm-Bawerk cited
three reasons for this difference in value. First of all, in a growing economy,
the supply of goods will always be larger in the future than it is in the
present. Secondly, people have a tendency to underestimate their future needs
due to carelessness and shortsightedness. Finally, entrepreneurs would rather
initiate production with goods presently available, instead of waiting for
future goods and delaying production. By contrast, George Reisman says that
time preference arises because of the possibility of being less able (say
through injury or the effects of aging) or totally unable (through substantial
incapacitation or death) to enjoy the use of goods in the future. The further
into the future someone considers, the less likely it is that this someone will
be able to enjoy the goods as much as they can be enjoyed now. The root of
time-preference in Reisman's view is an "internal" risk premium that is
specific to the owner of the goods, in contrast to an "external" risk premium
that is demanded when the owner invests them in a production process or lends
them to another. He then points out that the scarcity of capital combined with
the uncertainties he raises, means that time preference is unavoidable and
hence a minimum rate of return on that capital (such as in interest and normal
profit) is always going to be required by suppliers of capital. In "" (chapter
18), Ludwig von Mises discusses time inconsistency: that sooner-occurring
future intervals are valued more highly than later-occurring future intervals.
This observation has been observed in behavioral economics. Social anarchist
views. Many social anarchists object to the theory of time preference being
applied to an economy as a whole in a capitalist society. They argue that the
theory fails to take into account that making profits in a capitalist society
is not the provision of future means of consumption, but rather profits for
their own sake.
