Totalitarianism Totalitarianism (or totalitarian rule) is a political system
where the state holds total authority over the society and seeks to control all
aspects of public and private life wherever necessary. The concept of
totalitarianism was first developed in a positive sense in the 1920s by the
Italian fascists. The concept became prominent in Western anti-communist
political discourse during the Cold War era in order to highlight perceived
similarities between Nazi Germany and other fascist regimes on the one hand,
and Soviet communism on the other. Aside from fascist and Stalinist movements,
there have been other movements that are totalitarian. The leader of the
historic Spanish reactionary conservative movement called the Spanish
Confederation of the Autonomous Right declared his intention to "give Spain a
true unity, a new spirit, a totalitarian polity..." and went on to say
"Democracy is not an end but a means to the conquest of the new state. When the
time comes, either parliament submits or we will eliminate it." Etymology. As
an example, he stated that "We must finish once and for all with the neutrality
of chess. We must condemn once and for all the formula 'chess for the sake of
chess', like the formula 'art for art's sake'. We must organize shockbrigades
of chess-players, and begin immediate realization of a Five-Year Plan for
chess." Difference between authoritarian and totalitarian regimes. The term 'an
authoritarian regime' denotes a state in which the single power holder - an
individual 'dictator', a committee or a junta or an otherwise small group of
political elite - monopolizes political power. However, a totalitarian regime
attempts to control virtually all aspects of the social life including economy,
education, art, science, private life and morals of citizens. "The officially
proclaimed ideology penetrates into the deepest reaches of societal structure
and the totalitarian government seeks to completely control the thoughts and
actions of its citizens ." Thus, compared to totalitarian systems,
authoritarian systems may also leave a larger sphere for private life, lack a
guiding ideology, tolerate some pluralism in social organization, lack the
power to mobilize the whole population in pursuit of national goals, and
exercise their power within relatively predictable limits. Examples of the
term's use. One of the first to use the term "totalitarianism" in the English
language was the Austrian writer Franz Borkenau in his 1938 book "The Communist
International", in which he commented that it more united the Soviet and German
dictatorships than divided them. Isabel Paterson, in "The God of the Machine"
(1943), used the term in connection with the Soviet Union and Nazi Germany.
F.A. Hayek helped develop the idea of totalitarianism in his classic defense of
economic competition "The Road to Serfdom" (1944). In his Introduction, Hayek
contrasts Western Anglo values with Nazi Germany under Adolf Hitler, stating
that "the conflict between the National-Socialist "Right" and the "Left" in
Germany is the kind of conflict that will always arise between rival socialist
factions". He later conflates "Germany, Italy and Russia" going on to say that
"the history of these countries in the years before the rise of the
totalitarian system showed few features with which we are not familiar"
(Chapter 1, The Abandoned Road). During a 1945 lecture series entitled "The
Soviet Impact on the Western World" (published as a book in 1946), the pro-
Soviet British historian E. H. Carr claimed that "The trend away from
individualism and towards totalitarianism is everywhere unmistakable", and that
Marxism-Leninism was much the most successful type of totalitarianism, as
proved by Soviet industrial growth and the Red Army's role in defeating
Germany. Only the "blind and incurable" could ignore the trend towards
totalitarianism, said Carr. Karl Popper, in "The Open Society and Its Enemies"
(1945) and "The Poverty of Historicism" (1961), articulated an influential
critique of totalitarianism: in both works, he contrasted the "open society" of
liberal democracy with totalitarianism, and argued that the latter is grounded
in the belief that history moves toward an immutable future in accordance with
knowable laws. In "The Origins of Totalitarianism", Hannah Arendt argued that
Nazi and State communist regimes were new forms of government, and not merely
updated versions of the old tyrannies. According to Arendt, the source of the
mass appeal of totalitarian regimes is their ideology, which provides a
comforting, single answer to the mysteries of the past, present, and future.
For Nazism, all history is the history of race struggle; and, for Marxism, all
history is the history of class struggle. Once that premise is accepted, all
actions of the state can be justified by appeal to Nature or the Law of
History, justifying their establishment of authoritarian state apparatus.
Scholars such as Lawrence Aronsen, Richard Pipes, Leopold Labedz, Franz
Borkenau, Walter Laqueur, Karl Popper, Eckhard Jesse, Leonard Schapiro, Adam
Ulam, Raymond Aron, Claude Lefort, Richard Löwenthal, Hannah Arendt, Robert
Conquest, Karl Dietrich Bracher, Carl Joachim Friedrich and Juan Linz describe
totalitarianism in slightly different ways. They all agree, however, that
totalitarianism seeks to mobilize entire populations in support of an official
state ideology, and is intolerant of activities which are not directed towards
the goals of the state, entailing repression or state control of business,
labour unions, churches or political parties. Cold War-era research. The
political scientists Carl Friedrich and Zbigniew Brzezinski were primarily
responsible for expanding the usage of the term in university social science
and professional research, reformulating it as a paradigm for the Soviet Union
as well as fascist regimes. For Friedrich and Brzezinski, the defining elements
were intended to be taken as a mutually supportive organic entity composed of
the following: an elaborating guiding ideology; a single mass party, typically
led by a dictator; a system of terror; a monopoly of the means of communication
and physical force; and central direction, and control of the economy through
state planning. Such regimes had initial origins in the chaos that followed in
the wake of World War I, at which point the sophistication of modern weapons
and communications enabled totalitarian movements to consolidate power. The
German historian Karl Dietrich Bracher, whose work is primarily concerned with
Nazi Germany, argues that the "totalitarian typology" as developed by Friedrich
and Brzezinski is an excessively inflexible model, and failed to consider the
“revolutionary dynamic” that Bracher asserts is at the heart of
totalitarianism. Bracher maintains that the essence of totalitarianism is the
total claim to control and remake all aspects of society combined with an all-
embracing ideology, the value on authoritarian leadership, and the pretence of
the common identity of state and society, which distinguished the totalitarian
"closed" understanding of politics from the "open" democratic understanding.
Unlike the Friedrich-Brzezinski definition Bracher argued that totalitarian
regimes did not require a single leader and could function with a collective
leadership, which led the American historian Walter Laqueur to argue that
Bracher's definition seemed to fit reality better than the Friedrich-Brzezinski
definition. Eric Hoffer in his book "The True Believer" argues that mass
movements like communism, Fascism and Nazism had a common trait in picturing
Western democracies and their values as decadent, with people "too soft, too
pleasure-loving and too selfish" to sacrifice for a higher cause, which for
them implies an inner moral and biological decay. He further claims that those
movements offered the prospect of a glorious future to frustrated people,
enabling them to find a refuge from the lack of personal accomplishments in
their individual existence. The individual is then assimilated into a compact
collective body and "fact-proof screens from reality" are established.
Criticism and recent work with the concept. In the social sciences, the
approach of Friedrich and Brzezinski came under criticism from scholars who
argued that the Soviet system, both as a political and as a social entity, was
in fact better understood in terms of interest groups, competing elites, or
even in class terms (using the concept of the "nomenklatura" as a vehicle for a
new ruling class). These critics pointed to evidence of popular support for the
regime and widespread dispersion of power, at least in the implementation of
policy, among sectoral and regional authorities. For some followers of this
'pluralist' approach, this was evidence of the ability of the regime to adapt
to include new demands. However, proponents of the totalitarian model claimed
that the failure of the system to survive showed not only its inability to
adapt but the mere formality of supposed popular participation. From a
historical angle, the totalitarian concept has been criticized. Historians of
the Nazi period inclined towards a functionalist interpretation of the Third
Reich such as Martin Broszat, Hans Mommsen and Ian Kershaw have been very
hostile or lukewarm towards the totalitarianism concept, arguing that the Nazi
regime was far too disorganized to be considered as totalitarian. In the field
of Soviet history, the concept has been disparaged by the "revisionist" school,
a group of mostly American left-wing historians, some of whose more prominent
members are Sheila Fitzpatrick, Jerry F. Hough, William McCagg, Robert W.
Thurston, and J. Arch Getty. Though their individual interpretations differ,
the revisionists have argued that the Soviet state under Stalin was
institutionally weak, that the level of terror was much exaggerated, and that
to the extent it occurred, it reflected the weaknesses rather the strengths of
the Soviet state. Fitzpatrick argued that since to the extent that there was
terror in the Soviet Union, since it provided for increased social mobility,
and thus far from being a terrorized society, most people in the Soviet Union
supported Stalin's purges as a chance for a better life. Writing in 1987,
Walter Laqueur commented that the revisionists in the field of Soviet history
were guilty of confusing popularity with morality, and of making highly
embarrassing and not very convincing arguments against the concept of the
Soviet Union as totalitarian state. Laqueur argued the revisionists' arguments
with regard to Soviet history were highly similar to the arguments made by
Ernst Nolte regarding German history. Laqueur asserted that concepts such as
modernization were inadequate tools for explaining Soviet history while
totalitarianism was not. François Furet used the term "totalitarian twins" in
an attempt to link Stalinism and Nazism. Totalitarianism in architecture. Non-
political aspects of the culture and motifs of totalitarian countries have
themselves often been labeled innately "totalitarian". For example, Theodore
Dalrymple, a British author, physician, and political commentator, has written
for "City Journal" that brutalist structures are an expression of
totalitarianism given that their grand, concrete-based design involves
destroying gentler, more-human places such as gardens. In "1984", author George
Orwell described the Ministry of Truth as an "enormous, pyramidal structure of
white concrete, soaring up terrace after terrace, three hundred metres into the
air"; columnist Ben Macintyre of "The Times" has stated that that was "a
prescient description of the sort of totalitarian architecture that would soon
dominate the Communist bloc". Another example of totalitarianism in
architecture is the Panopticon, a type of institutional building designed by
English philosopher and social theorist Jeremy Bentham in the late eighteenth
century. The concept of the design is to allow a watchman to observe (-opticon)
all (pan-) inmates of an institution without their being able to tell whether
or not they are being watched. It was invoked by Michel Foucault (in Discipline
and Punish) as metaphor for "disciplinary" societies and their pervasive
inclination to observe and normalise. In popular culture. George Orwell's books
"Nineteen Eighty-Four" and "Animal Farm" are famous for their dystopian
depiction of totalitarian society, as is their lesser-known predecessor, "We"
by Yevgeny Zamyatin. Additional totalitarian regimes are also depicted in "The
Handmaid's Tale" by Margaret Atwood and "Brave New World" by Aldous Huxley.
According to Soviet writer Fazil Iskander, "Under the totalitarian regime, it
was as if you were forced to live in the same room with an insanely violent
man." In Suzanne Collins' trilogy, The Hunger Games, the nation of Panem is
ruled under a totalitarian government. In the Shadow Children series by
Margaret Peterson Haddix, the country is ruled under a totalitarian government.
