Total cost of ownership Total cost of ownership (TCO) is a financial estimate
whose purpose is to help consumers and enterprise managers determine direct and
indirect costs of a product or system. It is a management accounting concept
that can be used in full cost accounting or even ecological economics where it
includes social costs. For manufacturing, as TCO is typically compared with
doing business overseas, it goes beyond the initial manufacturing cycle time
and cost to make parts. TCO includes a variety of cost of doing business items,
for example, ship and re-ship, opportunity costs, while it also considers
incentives developed for an alternative approach. Incentives and other
variables include tax credits, common language, expediated delivery, customer
oriented supplier visits. Use of concept. TCO, when incorporated in any
financial benefit analysis, provides a cost basis for determining the total
economic value of an investment. Examples include: return on investment,
internal rate of return, economic value added, return on information
technology, and rapid economic justification. A TCO analysis includes total
cost of acquisition and operating costs. A TCO analysis is used to gauge the
viability of any capital investment. An enterprise may use it as a product/
process comparison tool. It is also used by credit markets and financing
agencies. TCO directly relates to an enterprise's asset and/or related systems
total costs across all projects and processes, thus giving a picture of the
profitability over time. Computer and software industries. TCO analysis was
popularized by the Gartner Group in 1987. The roots of this concept date at
least back to the first quarter of the twentieth century. Many different
methodologies and software tools have been developed to analyze TCO. TCO tries
to quantify the financial impact of deploying an information technology product
over its life cycle. These technologies include software and hardware, and
training. In the case of comparing TCO of existing versus proposed solutions,
consideration should put towards costs required to maintain the existing
solution that may not necessarily be required for a proposed solution. Examples
include cost of manual processing that are only required to support lack of
existing automation, and extended support personnel. Transportation industry.
The TCO concept is widely used in the transportation industry. For example, the
TCO defines the cost of owning an automobile from the time of purchase by the
owner, through its operation and maintenance to the time it leaves the
possession of the owner. Comparative TCO studies between various models help
consumers choose a car to fit their needs and budget.
