Trade bloc A trade bloc is a type of intergovernmental agreement, often part of
a regional intergovernmental organization, where regional barriers to trade,
(tariffs and non-tariff barriers) are reduced or eliminated among the
participating states. Description. One of the first economic blocs was the
German Customs Union ("Zollverein") initiated in 1834, formed on the basis of
the German Confederation and subsequently German Empire from 1871. Surges of
trade bloc formation were seen in the 1960s and 1970s, as well as in the 1990s
after the collapse of Communism. By 1997, more than 50% of all world commerce
was conducted under regional trade blocs. Economist Jeffrey J. Scott of the
Peterson Institute for International Economics notes that members of successful
trade blocs usually share four common traits: similar levels of per capita GNP,
geographic proximity, similar or compatible trading regimes, and political
commitment to regional organization. Advocates of worldwide free trade are
generally opposed to trading blocs, which, they argue, encourage regional as
opposed to global free trade. Scholars and economists continue to debate
whether regional trade blocs are leading to a more fragmented world economy or
encouraging the extension of the existing global multilateral trading system.
Trade blocs can be stand-alone agreements between several states (such as the
North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) or part of a regional organization
(such as the European Union). Depending on the level of economic integration,
trade blocs can fall into different categories, such as: preferential trading
areas, free trade areas, customs unions, common markets and economic and
monetary unions. Comparison between regional trade blocs. 1 not all members
participating yet2 involving goods, services, telecommunications, transport
(full liberalisation of railways from 2012), energy (full liberalisation from
2007)3 telecommunications, transport and energy - proposed4 sensitive goods to
be covered from 2019 5 least developed members to join from 2012 6 least
developed members to join from 2017 7 Additionally some non member states also
participate (the European Union, EFTA and NATO have overlapping membership and
various common initiatives regarding the European integration).8 Additionally
some non member states also participate (ASEAN Plus Three)
