Trade facilitation Trade facilitation looks at how procedures and controls
governing the movement of goods across national borders can be improved to
reduce associated cost burdens and maximise efficiency while safeguarding
legitimate regulatory objectives. Business costs may be a direct function of
collecting information and submitting declarations or an indirect consequence
of border checks in the form of delays and associated time penalties, forgone
business opportunities and reduced competitiveness. Understanding and use of
the term “trade facilitation” varies in the literature and amongst
practitioners. "Trade facilitation" is largely used by institutions which seek
to improve the regulatory interface between government bodies and traders at
national borders. The WTO, in an online training package, once defined trade
facilitation as: “The simplification and harmonisation of international trade
procedures” where trade procedures are the “activities, practices and
formalities involved in collecting, presenting, communicating and processing
data required for the movement of goods in international trade”. In defining
the term, many trade facilitation proponents will also make reference to trade
finance and the procedures applicable for making payments (e.g. via a
commercial banks). For example UN/CEFACT defines trade facilitation as "the
simplification, standardization and harmonisation of procedures and associated
information flows required to move goods from seller to buyer and to make
payment". Occasionally, the term trade facilitation is extended to address a
wider agenda in economic development and trade to include: the improvement of
transport infrastructure, the removal of government corruption, the
modernization of customs administration, the removal of other non-tariff trade
barriers, as well as export marketing and promotion. Examples of regulatory
activity in international trade. Collection of customs duties, excise duties
and other indirect taxes; payment mechanisms Security and anti smuggling
controls; dangerous goods; vehicle checks; immigration and visa formalities
Phytosanitary, veterinary and hygiene controls; health and safety measures;
CITES controls; ships’ waste Product testing; labelling; conformity checks
with marketing standards (e.g. fruit and vegetables) Administration of quota
restrictions; export refunds Topics and issues in trade facilitation. Trade
facilitation has its intellectual roots in the fields of logistics and supply
chain management. Trade facilitation looks at operational improvements at the
interface between business and government and associated transaction costs.
Trade facilitation has become a key feature in supply chain security and
customs modernisation programmes. Within the context of economic development it
has also come to prominence in the Doha Development Round. However, it is an
equally prominent feature in unilateral and bilateral initiatives that seek to
improve the trade environment and enhance business competitiveness. Reference
to trade facilitation is sometimes also made in the context of "better
regulation". Some organisations promoting trade facilitation will emphasis the
cutting of red tape in international trade as their main objective. Propagated
ideas and concepts to reforming trade and customs procedures generally resonate
around the following themes:
