Trade pact A trade pact (also known as "trade agreement") is a wide ranging
tax, tariff and trade pact that often includes investment guarantees. The most
common trade pacts are of the preferential and free trade types are concluded
in order to reduce (or eliminate) tariffs, quotas and other trade restrictions
on items traded between the signatories. Classification of trade pacts. By
number and type of signatories. A trade agreement is classified as "bilateral"
(BTA) when signed between two sides, where each side could be a country (or
other customs territory), a trade bloc or an informal group of countries (or
other customs territories). A trade agreement signed between more than two
sides (typically neighboring or in the same region) is classified as
"multilateral". By the World Trade Organization. Typically the benefits and
obligations of the trade agreements apply only to their signatories. In the
framework of the World Trade Organization a different agreement types are
concluded (mostly during new member accessions), whose terms apply to all WTO
members on the so-called most-favored basis (MFN), which means that beneficial
terms agreed bilaterally with one trading partner will apply also to the rest
of the WTO members. All agreements concluded outside of the WTO framework (and
granting additional benefits beyond the WTO MFN level, but applicable only
between the signatories and not to the rest of the WTO members) are called
"preferential" by the WTO. According to WTO rules these agreements are subject
to certain requirements such as notification to the WTO and general reciprocity
(the preferences should apply equally to each of the signatories of the
agreement) where unilateral preferences (some of the signatories gain
preferential access to the market of the other signatories, without lowering
their own tariffs) are allowed only under exceptional circumstances and as
temporary measure. The trade agreements called "preferential" by the WTO are
also known as "regional" (RTA), despite not necessarily concluded by countries
within a certain region. There are currently 205 agreements in force as of July
2007. Over 300 have been reported to the WTO. The number of FTA has increased
significantly over the last decade. Between 1948 to 1994, the General Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), the predecessor to the WTO, received 124
notifications. Since 1995 over 300 trade agreements have been enacted.
Reaction. Trade pacts are frequently politically contentious since they may
change economic customs and deepen interdependence with trade partners.
Increasing efficiency through "free trade" is a common goal. For the most part,
governments are supportive of further trade agreements. There have been however
some concerns expressed by the WTO. According to Pascal Lamy, Director-General
of the WTO, the proliferation of RTA “...is breeding concern — concern
about incoherence, confusion, exponential increase of costs for business,
unpredictability and even unfairness in trade relations.” The position of the
WTO is that while the typical trade agreements (called "preferential" or
"regional" by the WTO) are useful to a degree, it is much more beneficial to
focus on global agreements in the WTO framework such as the negotiations of the
current Doha round. The anti-globalization movement opposes such agreements
almost by definition, but some groups normally allied within that movement,
e.g. green parties, seek fair trade or safe trade provisions that moderate what
they perceive to be the ill effects of globalization.
