Traditional authority Traditional authority (also known as traditional
domination) is a form of leadership in which the authority of an organization
or a ruling regime is largely tied to tradition or custom. The main reason for
the given state of affairs is that it 'has always been that way'. Traditional
authority in sociology. In sociology, the concept of traditional authority
(domination) comes from Max Weber's tripartite classification of authority, the
other two forms being charismatic authority and rational-legal authority. All
of those three domination types represent an example of his ideal type concept.
Weber noted that in history those ideal types of domination are always found in
combinations. In traditional authority, the legitimacy of the authority comes
from tradition; in charismatic authority from the personality and leadership
qualities of the individual; and in rational-legal authority from powers that
are bureaucratically and legally attached to certain positions. Patriarchs and
their households. Weber derives the traditional domination from patriarchs and
their households - in other words, from the ancient tradition of family (the
authority of a master over his household). The master is designated in
accordance with the rules of inheritance. He has no administrative staff nor
any machinery to enforce his will by force alone; he depends on the willingness
of the group members to respect his authority. Those members stand in personal
relations to him. They obey him based on the belief that this is their duty
sanctioned by immemorial tradition and on feeling of filial piety for the
person of the master. Patrimonialism. Patrimonial government occurs when the
ruler's household expands with the household administration giving rise to
governmental offices. All officials are personal dependents or favourites of
the ruler, appointed by him. Their interactions with the ruler are based on
paternal authority and filial dependence. The officials treat their work as a
personal service to the ruler. The ruler has complete control over the
officials; he empowers them from case to case, assigns specific tasks, promotes
and demotes. They have no rights, rather they have privileges granted and
withdrawn by the ruler. It is rare to discover any clear and stable hierarchy
and responsibility in the deluge of official titles of most patrimonial
administrations. Military force is an important instrument of a patrimonial
rule. Weber distinguished five types of military organisations. In all of those
cases the military is a tool of the ruler, solely for his use - but he is
responsible for its upkeep (equipment, maintenance and wages). With the growth
of the territory organized and more independent administrative staff and
military force became a necessity. This usually leads to decentralisation, and
some individuals gain more independence in the form of certain rights (for
example, the right to inheritance and marriage without the consent of the
rulers, to be judged by independent courts instead of officials of the royal
household, etc.). One of the best examples of almost pure type of
patrimonialism is Ancient Egypt, where the population was entirely dependent
upon the control of the waterways (Nile River). This facilitated the creation
of centralised government. When the royal household required it, the individual
had to forced to perform the public duties, such as participate in labor-
intensive project (rising of the pyramids). Thus the whole country was in fact
the patriarchal household of the pharaoh. When land is given to military or
officials for the performance of their duties, their independence increases and
the power of the ruler weakens (consider the Mameluks and their rebellions, or
the difference between Chinese Confucian literati who were never able to
overthrow the power of the emperor and European knights who evolved into
powerful aristocracy in many cases vastly limiting the power of the kings
(especially in the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth)). Patrimonial dominance has
often prevailed in the Orient, where land remained in the control of the ruler.
However, in the Occident the ruler lost control of the lands given to the
nobility, which according to Weber was a major reason for patrimonialism being
replaced by feudalism. Feudalism. Feudalism when compared to patrimonalism, has
one major similarity and several important differences. The similarity is that
both are based on tradition and have powerful rulers who grant rights in return
for military and administrative services. Traditional leaders. Most of the
representatives of any dynasty ruling for more than one generation (kings,
emperors, sultans, etc.) would fall into that category. Thus majority
monarchies and some autocracies, oligarchies and theocracies would be ruled by
traditional leaders. Often male head of a common family should be considered a
traditional leader. This could also be the case in a family-owned business, if
its director and other leader positions are chosen based on family ties and/or
age.
