Tragedy of the commons In economics, the tragedy of the commons is the
depletion of a shared resource by individuals, acting independently and
rationally according to each one's self-interest, despite their understanding
that depleting the common resource is contrary to their long-term best
interests. In 1968, ecologist Garrett Hardin explored this social dilemma in
"The Tragedy of the Commons", published in the journal "Science". Theories and
examples. Central to Hardin's article is an example (first sketched in an 1833
pamphlet by William Forster Lloyd) involving medieval land tenure in Europe, of
herders sharing a common parcel of land, on which they are each entitled to let
their cows graze. In Hardin's example, it is in each herder's interest to put
the next (and succeeding) cows he acquires onto the land, even if the quality
of the common is damaged for all as a result, through overgrazing. The herder
receives all of the benefits from an additional cow, while the damage to the
common is shared by the entire group. If all herders make this individually
rational economic decision, the common will be depleted or even destroyed, to
the detriment of all. Hardin also cites modern examples, including the
overfishing of the world's oceans and ranchers who graze their cattle on
government lands in the American West. A similar dilemma of the commons had
been discussed by agrarian reformers since the 18th century. Hardin's
predecessors used the alleged tragedy, as well as a variety of examples from
the Greek Classics, to justify the enclosure movement. German historian Joachim
Radkau sees Garrett Hardin's writings as having a different aim in that Hardin
asks for a strict management of common goods via increased government
involvement or/and international regulation bodies. While Hardin recommended
that the tragedy of the commons could be prevented by either more government
regulation or privatizing the commons property, subsequent Nobel Prize-winning
work by Elinor Ostrom suggests that handing control of local areas to national
and international regulators can create further problems. Ostrom argues that
the tragedy of the commons may not be as prevalent or as difficult to solve as
Hardin implies, since locals have often come up with solutions to the commons
problem themselves; when the commons is taken over by non-locals, those
solutions can no longer be used. Ostrom recognizes that there are real
problems, and even limited situations where the tragedy of the commons applies
to real-world resource management. Hardin's work has been criticised on the
grounds of historical inaccuracy, and for failing to distinguish between common
property and open access resources. As Hardin acknowledged there was a
fundamental mistake in the use of the term "commons." This was already noted in
1975 by Ciriacy-Wantrup & Bishop (1975: 714) who wrote that we "are not free to
use the concept 'common property resources' or 'commons' under conditions where
no institutional arrangements exist. Common property is not 'everybody's
property' (...). To describe unowned resource (res nullius) as common property
(res communis), as many economists have done for years (...) is a self-
contradiction." Hardin's commons theory is frequently cited to support the
notion of sustainable development, meshing economic growth and environmental
protection, and has had an effect on numerous current issues, including the
debate over global warming. An asserted impending "tragedy of the commons" is
frequently warned of as a consequence for adopting policies which restrict
private property and espouse expansion of public property. History of the idea.
References to the Greek classics. Thucydides (ca. 460 BC-ca. 395 BC) stated:
"hey devote a very small fraction of time to the consideration of any public
object, most of it to the prosecution of their own objects. Meanwhile each
fancies that no harm will come to his neglect, that it is the business of
somebody else to look after this or that for him; and so, by the same notion
being entertained by all separately, the common cause imperceptibly decays."
Aristotle (384-322 BC) similarly argued against common goods of the "polis" of
Athens: "That all persons call the same thing mine in the sense in which each
does so may be a fine thing, but it is impracticable; or if the words are taken
in the other sense, such a unity in no way conduces to harmony. And there is
another objection to the proposal. For that which is common to the greatest
number has the least care bestowed upon it. Every one thinks chiefly of his
own, hardly at all of the common interest; and only when he is himself
concerned as an individual. For besides other considerations, everybody is more
inclined to neglect the duty which he expects another to fulfill; as in
families many attendants are often less useful than a few." Later commentary.
In the 16th century School of Salamanca, Luis de Molina observed that
individual owners take better care of their goods than they do of common
property. More recently, William Forster Lloyd noted the comparison with
medieval village land holding in his 1833 book on population. Such a notion is
not merely an abstraction, but its consequences have manifested literally in
such common grounds as the Boston Common, where overgrazing led to
discontinuation of the common's use as public grazing ground. Radkau gives
further, more positive examples and alleges the "real tragedy of the commons"
to be ruthless use of common land motivated by agrarian reforms. Garrett
Hardin's essay. Summary. This parental reproductive freedom was endorsed by the
1968 UN Proclamation of Tehran. Hardin advocates repudiation of this element of
the Proclamation. To make the case for "no technical solutions," Hardin notes
the limits placed on the availability of energy (and material resources) on
Earth, and also the consequences of these limits for "quality of life." To
maximize population, one needs to minimize resources spent on anything other
than simple survival, and "vice versa". Consequently, he concludes that there
is no foreseeable technical solution to increasing both human populations and
their standard of living on a finite planet. Crucially, division of these costs
and benefits is unequal: the individual herder gains all of the advantage, but
the disadvantage is shared among all herders using the pasture. Assuming that
the negative impact on the herder's other animals is less than the income of a
new one, the rational course of action for each individual herder will always
be herd expansion. Since all herders reach the same conclusion, overgrazing is
inevitable. Each herder will continue to impose costs on all of the others,
until the pasture is depleted. Because this sequence of events follows
predictably from the behavior of the participants, Hardin describes it as a
"tragedy." In the course of his essay, Hardin develops the theme, drawing in
examples of latter day "commons," such as the atmosphere, oceans, rivers, fish
stocks, national parks, advertising, and even parking meters. The example of
fish stocks had led some to call this the "tragedy of the fishers." Throughout
the essay the impact of human population growth is a concern, with the Earth's
resources being a general common. The essay addresses potential management
solutions to commons problems including privatization, polluter pays, and
regulation. Keeping with his original pasture analogy, Hardin categorizes these
as effectively the "enclosure" of commons, and notes a historical progression
from the use of all resources as commons (unregulated access to all) to systems
in which commons are "enclosed" and subject to methods of regulated use in
which access is prohibited or controlled. Hardin argues against relying on
conscience as a means of policing commons, suggesting that this favors selfish
individuals¬ ‚Äî often known as free riders¬ ‚Äî over those who are more
altruistic. In the context of avoiding over-exploitation of common resources,
Hardin concludes by restating Hegel's maxim (which was quoted by Engels),
"freedom is the recognition of necessity." He suggests that "freedom" completes
the tragedy of the commons. By recognizing resources as commons in the first
place, and by recognizing that, as such, they require management, Hardin
believes that humans "can preserve and nurture other and more precious
freedoms." Aside from its subject matter (resource use), the essay is notable
(at least in modern scientific circles) for explicitly dealing with issues of
morality, and doing so in one of the scientific community's premier journals,
"Science." Indeed, the subtitle for the essay is "The population problem has no
technical solution; it requires a fundamental extension in morality." Meaning.
The metaphor illustrates the argument that free access and unrestricted demand
for a finite resource ultimately reduces the resource through over-
exploitation, temporarily or permanently. This occurs because the benefits of
exploitation accrue to individuals or groups, each of whom is motivated to
maximize use of the resource to the point in which they become reliant on it,
while the costs of the exploitation are borne by all those to whom the resource
is available (which may be a wider class of individuals than those who are
exploiting it). This, in turn, causes demand for the resource to increase,
which causes the problem to snowball to the point that the resource is depleted
(even if it retains a capacity to recover). The rate at which depletion of the
resource is realized depends primarily on three factors: the number of users
wanting to consume the common in question, the consumptiveness of their uses,
and the relative robustness of the common. Like William Lloyd and Thomas
Malthus before him, Hardin was primarily interested in the problem of human
population growth. In his essay he also focused on the use of larger (though
still limited) resources such as the Earth's atmosphere and oceans, as well as
pointing out the "negative commons" of pollution (i.e., instead of dealing with
the deliberate privatization of a positive resource, a "negative commons" deals
with the deliberate commonization of a negative cost, pollution). As a
metaphor, the tragedy of the commons should not be taken too literally. The
phrase is shorthand for a structural relationship and the consequences of that
relationship, not a precise description of it. The "tragedy" should not be seen
as tragic in the conventional sense, nor must it be taken as condemnation of
the processes that are ascribed to it. Similarly, Hardin's use of "commons" has
frequently been misunderstood, leading Hardin to later remark that he should
have titled his work "The Tragedy of the Unregulated Commons". The tragedy of
the commons has particular relevance in analyzing behavior in the fields of
economics, evolutionary psychology, game theory, politics, taxation, and
sociology. Some also see it as an example of emergent behavior, with the
"tragedy" the outcome of individual interactions in a complex system.
Criticisms. Hardin's essay has been widely criticized. Public policy experts
have argued that Hardin's account of the breakdown of common grazing land was
inaccurate, and that such commons were effectively managed to prevent
overgrazing. Referring to Hardin's crucial passage on page 1244,17 Partha
Dasgupta, for example, comments that "it is difficult to find a passage of
comparable length and fame that contains so many errors as the one quoted."
More significantly, criticism has been fueled by the application of Hardin's
ideas to current policy issues. In particular, some authorities have read
Hardin's work as specifically advocating the privatization of commonly owned
resources. Consequently, resources that have traditionally been managed
communally by local organizations have been enclosed or privatized. Ostensibly,
this serves to protect such resources, but it ignores the pre-existing
management, often appropriating resources and alienating indigenous (and
frequently poor) populations. In effect, private or state use may result in
worse outcomes than the previous management of commons. Some of this
controversy stems from disagreement over whether individuals will always behave
in the selfish fashion posited by Hardin. Others have argued that even self-
interested individuals will often find ways to cooperate, because collective
restraint serves both the collective and individual interests. Hardin's piece
has also been criticised as promoting the interests of Western economic
ideology. G. N. Appell, an anthropologist, states: "Hardin's claim has been
embraced as a sacred text by scholars and professionals in the practice of
designing futures for others and imposing their own economic and environmental
rationality on other social systems of which they have incomplete understanding
and knowledge." Hardin's advocacy of clearly defined property rights has
frequently been used as an argument for privatization, or private property,
"per se." The opposite situation to a tragedy of the commons is sometimes
referred to as a tragedy of the anticommons: a situation in which rational
individuals (acting separately) collectively waste a given resource by under-
utilizing it. ‚ÄúTo judge from the critical literature, the weightiest mistake
in my synthesizing paper was the omission of the modifying adjective
‚Äúunmanaged.‚Äù In correcting this omission, one can generalize the practical
conclusion in this way: ‚ÄúA ‚Äòmanaged commons' describes either socialism or
the privatism of free enterprise. Either one may work; either one may fail:
‚ÄòThe devil is in the details.‚Äô But with an unmanaged commons, you can
forget about the devil: As overuse of resources reduces carrying capacity, ruin
is inevitable.‚Äù With this modification firmly in place, ‚ÄúThe Tragedy of the
Commons‚Äù is well tailored for further interdisciplinary syntheses.‚Äù
Application. Modern commons. The "tragedy of the commons" can be considered in
relation to environmental issues such as sustainability. The commons dilemma
stands as a model for a great variety of resource problems in society today,
such as water, land, fish, and non-renewable energy sources such as oil and
coal. Situations exemplifying the "tragedy of the commons" include the
overfishing and destruction of the Grand Banks, the destruction of salmon runs
on rivers that have been dammed most prominently in modern times on the
Columbia River in the Northwest United States, and historically in North
Atlantic rivers the devastation of the sturgeon fishery in modern Russia, but
historically in the United States as well and, in terms of water supply, the
limited water available in arid regions (e.g., the area of the Aral Sea) and
the Los Angeles water system supply, especially at Mono Lake and Owens Lake.
Other situations exemplifying the "tragedy of the commons" include pollution
caused by driving cars. There are many negative externalities of driving; these
include congestion, carbon emissions, and traffic accidents. For example, every
time 'Person A' gets in a car, it becomes more likely that 'Person Z' and
millions of others will suffer in each of those areas. Still other examples
include the US Federal budget. The federal budget being analogous to a common
pasture on which 535 congressional cows graze. Modern solutions. Articulating
solutions to the tragedy of the commons is one of the main problems of
political philosophy. In absence of enlightened self-interest, some form of
authority or federation is needed to solve the collective action problem. In a
typical example, governmental regulations can limit the amount of a common good
available for use by any individual. Permit systems for extractive economic
activities including mining, fishing, hunting, livestock raising and timber
extraction are examples of this approach. Similarly, limits to pollution are
examples of governmental intervention on behalf of the commons. Alternatively,
resource users themselves can cooperate to conserve the resource in the name of
mutual benefit. Another solution for some resources is to convert common good
into private property, giving the new owner an incentive to enforce its
sustainability. Effectively, this is what took place in the English Inclosure
Acts. Increasingly, many agrarian studies scholars advocate studying
traditional commons management systems to understand how common resources can
be protected without alienating those whose livelihoods depend upon them. An
opposing idea, used by the United Nations Moon Treaty, Outer Space Treaty and
Law of the Sea Treaty as well as the UNESCO World Heritage Convention involves
the international law principle that designates some areas or resources the
Common Heritage of Mankind. Ludwig von Mises, Part IV, Chapter 10, Sec. VI,
"National√∂konomie: Theorie des Handelns und Wirtschaftens" (Geneva: Editions
Union, 1940). The quote provided is that of Mises's expanded English
translation, Chapter XXIII: "The Data of the Market", Sec. 6: "The Limits of
Property Rights and the Problems of External Costs and External Economies", ""
(New Haven: Yale University Press, 1949). Also available here. An objection to
the privatization approach is that many commons (such as the ozone layer or
global fish populations) would be extremely difficult or impossible to
privatize. Psychologist Dennis Fox used a number, what is now termed "Dunbar's
number", to take a new look at the tragedy of the commons. In a 1985 paper
titled "Psychology, Ideology, Utopia, & the Commons", he stated "Edney (1980,
1981a) also argued that long-term solutions will require, among a number of
other approaches, breaking down commons into smaller segments. He reviewed
experimental data showing that cooperative behavior is indeed more common in
smaller groups. After estimating that "the upper limit for a simple, self-
contained, sustaining, well-functioning commons may be as low as 150 people"
(1981a, p.¬ 27). Costa Rica has successfully advanced the growth of its
ecotourism business by taking account of, and pricing for, the environmental
business services consumed by pollution. The Coast Salish managed their natural
resources in a place-based system in which families were responsible for
looking after a place and its resources. Access to food was the major source of
wealth and the empowerment of generosity was highly valued, so it made sense
for them to take care of the resources. The "Coasian" solution to the problem
is also a popular one, whereby the people formerly using the common each gain
their own individual part of it instead¬ ‚Äî so it is no longer a common¬ ‚Äî
and do not have to support one another so as not to deplete the resource. In
Hardin's essay, he proposed that the solution to the problem of overpopulation
must be based on "mutual coercion, mutually agreed upon" and result in
"relinquishing the freedom to breed". Hardin discussed this topic further in a
1979 book, "Managing the Commons," co-written with John A. Baden. He framed
this prescription in terms of needing to restrict the "reproductive right" in
order to safeguard all other rights. Only one large country has adopted this
policy, the People's Republic of China. In the essay, Hardin had rejected
education as an effective means of stemming population growth. Since that time,
it has been shown that increased educational and economic opportunities for
women correlates well with reduced birthrates in most countries, as does
economic growth in general. However, given the nature of the problem as a limit
to a given common resource, economic growth resulting in a higher per capita
use of the resource may more than offset the decreased population growth's
effect on total resource consumption. Note, however, that this now becomes a
problem of economic expectations of a given population, and the problem of
birth regulation appears to be eliminated. Application to evolutionary biology.
The "tragedy of the commons" is referred to in studies of evolutionary biology,
social evolution, sociobiology and behavioral ecology. A tragedy of the commons
is brought about by selfish individuals whose genes for selfish behaviour would
therefore come to predominate, so the metaphor cannot explain how altruism
arises. This question is addressed instead by models of possible mechanisms
that can give rise to "reciprocal altruism," leading to ideas like the "tit for
tat" rule (reciprocation). These models freed evolutionary theory from the
limitations imposed by the concept of "inclusive fitness," a previous
explanation for altruism, which proposed that organisms help others only to the
extent that by doing so they increase the probability of passing shared genes
to the next generation. A parallel was drawn recently between the tragedy of
the commons and the competing behaviour of parasites that through acting
selfishly eventually diminish or destroy their common host. The idea has also
been applied to areas such as the evolution of virulence or sexual conflict,
where males may fatally harm females when competing for matings. It is also
raised as a question in studies of social insects, where scientists wish to
understand why insect workers do not undermine the "common good" by laying eggs
of their own and causing a breakdown of the society. The idea of evolutionary
suicide, where adaptation at the level of the individual causes the whole
species or population to be driven extinct, can be seen as an extreme form of
an evolutionary tragedy of the commons. The commons dilemma.  The "commons
dilemma" is a specific class of social dilemma in which people's short-term
selfish interests are at odds with long-term group interests and the common
good. In academia, a range of related terminology has also been used as
shorthand for the theory or aspects of it, including "resource dilemma", "take-
some dilemma", and "common pool resource". Commons dilemma researchers have
studied conditions under which groups and communities are likely to under- or
over-harvest common resources in both the laboratory and field. Research
programs have concentrated on a number of motivational, strategic, and
structural factors that might be conducive to management of commons. In game
theory, which constructs mathematical models for individuals' behavior in
strategic situations, the corresponding "game", developed by the ecologist
Garrett Hardin, is known as the Commonize Costs¬ ‚Äî Privatize Profits Game
(CC‚ÄìPP game). Psychological factors. Kopelman, Weber, & Messick (2002), in a
review of the experimental research on cooperation in commons dilemmas,
identify nine classes of independent variables that influence cooperation in
commons dilemmas: social motives, gender, payoff structure, uncertainty, power
and status, group size, communication, causes, and frames. They organize these
classes and distinguish between psychological individual differences (stable
personality traits) and situational factors (the environment). Situational
factors include both the task (social and decision structure) and the
perception of the task. Another important factor‚Äîthat is not covered in the
review by Kopelman et all (2002) -- is culture. Empirical findings support the
theoretical argument that the cultural group is a critical factor that needs to
be studied in the context of situational variables (Gelfand & Dyer, 2000).
Rather than behaving in line with economic incentives, people are likely to
approach the decision to cooperate with an appropriateness framework (Weber et
al, 2004). An expanded, four factor model of the Logic of Appropriateness
(Kopelman, 2009; Myers & Kopelman, 2012), suggests that the cooperation is
better explained by the question: ‚Äò‚Äòwhat does a person like me (identity)
do (rules) in a situation like this (recognition) given this culture
(group)?‚Äù ‚ÄúThe modern history of social psychological research on common
property management, commons dilemmas, resource dilemmas, or social dilemmas -
- as the field is variously labeled -- began in the 1950s. Von Neumann and
Morgenstern in their path-breaking book, Theory of Games and Economic Behavior
(1944) introduced a specific class of models that outlined a theory of
individual decision-making (with the axiomatization of preferences and
utilities) and proposed a theory of social interdependence for both zero-sum
and non-zero-sum games. Although economists had been studying departures from
competitive equilibrium models since the turn of the century, this book spurred
a flurry of empirical investigations that explored decision-making and utility
functions. By the late 1950s, the general ideas of game theory had been
introduced to social psychologists in a formal manner by Luce & Raiffa (1957)
and in terms of psychological theory by Thibaut & Kelley (1959)‚Ä¶ The 1960s
saw the proliferation of experiments on two-person games, largely prisoners‚Äô
dilemma games, and, more importantly, on the generalization of the prisoners‚Äô
dilemma idea to applied, multi-person situations‚Ä¶ More generally, throughout
the 1970s and 80s, psychologists examined factors that influence cooperation
across the range of social dilemmas, including commons dilemmas, prisoners‚Äô
dilemmas, and public goods tasks (for a broader review of social dilemmas in
the social psychological research see Dawes, 1980; Komorita & Parks, 1994;
Messick & Brewer, 1983). Much of the early work on Prisoners‚Äô dilemmas was
criticized on the grounds that it was atheoretical and that it had little to
say about extra-laboratory affairs (Pruitt & Kimmel, 1977).‚Äù (Kopelman,
Weber, & Messick, 2002, p. 114-115). Broader review of social dilemmas in the
social psychological research, also include earlier research on commons
dilemmas, as well as public goods, prisoner's dilemmas, and more (Dawes, 1980;
Komorita & Parks, 1994; Messick & Brewer, 1983). Strategic factors. Strategic
factors also matter in commons dilemmas. One often-studied strategic factor is
the order in which people take harvests from the resource. In simultaneous
play, all people harvest at the same time, whereas in sequential play people
harvest from the pool according to a predetermined sequence¬ ‚Äî first, second,
third, etc. There is a clear order effect in the latter games: the harvests of
those who come first¬ ‚Äî the leaders¬ ‚Äî are higher than the harvest of those
coming later¬ ‚Äî the followers. The interpretation of this effect is that the
first players feel entitled to take more. With sequential play, individuals
adopt a first come-first served rule, whereas with simultaneous play people may
adopt an equality rule. Another strategic factor is the ability to build up
reputations. Research found that people take less from the common pool in
public situations than in anonymous private situations. Moreover, those who
harvest less gain greater prestige and influence within their group. Structural
factors. Much research has focused on when and why people would like to
structurally rearrange the commons to prevent a tragedy. Hardin stated in his
analysis of the tragedy of the commons that "Freedom in a commons brings ruin
to all." One of the proposed solutions is to appoint a leader to regulate
access to the common. Groups are more likely to endorse a leader when a common
resource is being depleted and when managing a common resource is perceived as
a difficult task. Groups prefer leaders who are elected, democratic, and
prototypical of the group, and these leader types are more successful in
enforcing cooperation. A general aversion to autocratic leadership exists,
although it may be an effective solution, possibly because of the fear of power
abuse and corruption. The provision of rewards and punishments may also be
effective in preserving common resources. Selective punishments for overuse can
be effective in promoting domestic water and energy conservation¬ ‚Äî for
example, through installing water and electricity meters in houses. Selective
rewards work, provided that they are open to everyone. An experimental carpool
lane in the Netherlands failed because car commuters did not feel they were
able to organize a carpool. The rewards do not have to be tangible. In Canada
there is a movement to put "smiley faces" on electricity bills if you are below
the average for your class. Much field research on commons dilemmas has
combined solutions obtained in experimental research. Elinor Ostrom, who was
awarded 2009's Nobel Prize of Economics for her work on the issue, and her
colleagues looked at how real-world communities manage communal resources, such
as fisheries, land irrigation systems, and farmlands, and they identified a
number of factors conducive to successful resource management. One factor is
the resource itself; resources with definable boundaries (e.g., land) can be
preserved much more easily. A second factor is resource dependence; there must
be a perceptible threat of resource depletion, and it must be difficult to find
substitutes. The third is the presence of a community; small and stable
populations with a thick social network and social norms promoting conservation
do better. A final condition is that there be appropriate community-based rules
and procedures in place with built-in incentives for responsible use and
punishments for overuse. Related outcomes. The prevalent outcome depends on the
details of the situation. The opposite outcome to the "tragedy" is the "comedy
of the commons" or "Inverse commons", in which network effects or other causes
enhance the value of rivalrous resources "because of" the lack of regulation or
private ownership.
