Tragedy of the anticommons The tragedy of the anticommons is a coordination
breakdown where the existence of numerous rightsholders frustrates achieving a
socially desirable outcome. It mirrors the older tragedy of the commons used to
describe coordination breakdowns arising from insufficient rightsholders. The
concept covers a range of coordination failures including patent thickets,
submarine patents, and nail houses. Overcoming these breakdowns can be
difficult, but there are assorted means including eminent domain, Laches,
patent pools, or other licensing organizations. The term originally appeared in
Michael Heller's 1998 article of the same name and is the thesis of his 2008
book. In a 1998 article in "Science", Heller and Rebecca Eisenberg, while not
disputing role of patents in general in motivating invention and disclosure,
argue that biomedical research was one of several key areas where competing
patent rights could actually prevent useful and affordable products from
reaching the marketplace. Proponents of the theory claimed that too many
property rights could lead to less innovation. Classic example. In Heller's
1998 Harvard Law Review article, he noted that after the fall of Communism, in
many Eastern European cities there were a lot of open air kiosks, but also a
lot of empty stores. Upon investigation, he concluded that because many
different agencies and private parties had rights over the use of store space,
it was difficult or even impossible for a startup retailer to negotiate
successfully the use of that space. Even though all the persons with ownership
rights were losing money with the empty stores, and stores were in great
demand, their competing interests got in the way of the effective use of space.
Copyrights. In the same way, competing use of copyright can prevent a product
from coming to the marketplace at a reasonable price, resulting in lost royalty
income for the copyright holders. For example, "WKRP in Cincinnati" was one of
the most popular syndicated sitcoms of all time, and many television shows from
that era have been successfully released on DVD. However, for many years, WKRP
was not available on DVD. When it was a television program, an agreement was in
place between television producers and music licensing organizations such as
ASCAP and BMI wherein a standard licensing fee was paid for each song that was
played on a television show. As such, the producers could determine how much
money would be paid for their use of music clips and budget accordingly.
However, there is no similar standard agreement for use of music on DVDs (which
ASCAP and BMI do not control), and producers of programs from that era (and
into the present) are now faced with the prospect of negotiating individually
with several dozen composers. The current owner of the show, 20th Century Fox,
released the show on DVD starting in the first half of 2007, using "soundalike"
versions of music for which they could not obtain rights. Eminent domain. To
construct roads, railroads, and similar transportation arteries, eminent domain
has long been considered necessary. Although the benefit to society from the
transportation route may be substantial, without eminent domain, every single
property owner along the way must agree for the route to be built. This
provides conditions for the tragedy of the anticommons, as even if hundreds
agree, a single landowner can stop the road or railroad. The ability for one
person to veto the construction drastically increases the transaction costs for
such projects.
