Transformation problem In 20th-century discussions of Karl Marx's economics the
transformation problem is the problem of finding a general rule to transform
the "values" of commodities (based on socially necessary labour content
according to his labour theory of value) into the "competitive prices" of the
marketplace. This problem was first introduced by Marx in Chapter 9 of
"Capital's" draft Volume III, where he also sketched a solution. The essential
difficulty was this: given that Marx derived profit, in the form of surplus
value, from direct labour inputs, and that the ratio of direct labour input to
capital input varied widely between commodities, how could he reconcile this
with the tendency to an average rate of profit on all capital invested? Marx's
theory. Marx defines value as the number of hours of labor contained in a
commodity. This includes two elements: First, it includes the hours that a
worker of normal skill and dedication would take to produce a commodity under
average conditions and with the usual equipment (Marx terms this living labor).
Second, it includes the labor embodied in raw materials, tools and machinery
used up or worn away during its production (which Marx terms "dead labor").
Workers work a portion of their day reproducing the value of their means of
subsistence (represented as wages), and a portion of their day producing value
above and beyond that, referred to as surplus value. Since according to Marx
the source of capitalist profit is this surplus labor of the workers, and since
in this theory only new, living labor produces profit, it would appear to be
logical that enterprises with a low organic composition (a higher proportion of
capital spent on new living labor) would have a higher rate of profit than
enterprises with a high organic composition (a higher proportion of capital
spent on raw materials and means of production). However, higher rates of
profit are not generally found in low-organic composition enterprises or vice
versa. Instead, there is a tendency toward equalization of the rate of profit
in industries of different organic compositions. Marx outlined the
transformation problem as a theoretical solution to this discrepancy. The
tendency of the rate of profit toward equalization means that in this theory
there is no simple translation from value to money ‚Äì e.g. "1 hour of value
equals 20 dollars" ‚Äì which is the same across every sector of the economy.
While such a simple translation may hold approximately true in general, Marx
postulated that there is an economy-wide, systematic deviation according to the
organic compositions of the different industries in society, such that "1 hour
of value equals 20 dollars times T", where "T" represents a transformation
factor which varies according to the organic composition of the industry in
consideration. In this theory, "T" is approximately 1 in industries where the
organic composition is close to average, it is less than 1 in industries where
the organic composition is lower than average, and greater than 1 in industries
where the organic composition is higher than average. Note: It should be
recalled that because Marx is considering only socially necessary, simple
labor, this variation from industry to industry has nothing to do with higher-
paid skilled, versus lower-paid unskilled labor. This transformation factor
varies only with respect to the organic compositions of different industries.
British classical labour theory of value. Marx's value theory was developed
from the labour theory of value discussed by Adam Smith and used by many
British classical economists. It became central to his economics. Simplest
case: labour costs only. Consider the very simple example used by Adam Smith to
introduce the subject. Assume a hunters‚Äô economy with free land, no slavery
and no significant current production of tools, where beavers formula_1 and
deer formula_2 are hunted. In the language of modern linear production models,
call the unit labour-input requirement for the production of each good
formula_3, where formula_4 may be formula_5 or formula_6 (i.e., formula_3 is
the number of hours of uniform labour normally required to catch either a
beaver or a deer; notice that we need to assume labour as uniform in order to
be able, later on, to use a uniform wage rate). Then‚ÄîSmith noticed‚Äîeach
hunter will be willing to exchange one deer (which costs him formula_8hours)
for formula_9 beavers. The ratio formula_9‚Äîi.e. the relative amount of labour
embodied in (unit) deer production with respect to beaver‚Äîgives thus the
exchange ratio between deer and beavers, the "relative price" of deer in units
of beavers. Moreover, since the only costs are here labour costs, that ratio is
also the "relative unit cost" of deer for any given competitive uniform wage
rate formula_11. Hence the relative amount of labour embodied in deer
production coincides with the "competitive relative price" of deer in units of
beavers, which can be written as formula_12 (where the formula_13 stands for
absolute competitive prices in some arbitrary unit of account, and are defined
as formula_14). Capital costs. where formula_20 stands for the capital cost
incurred in using each arrow. Now, this capital cost is made up of two parts.
First, there is the replacement cost of substituting the arrow when it is lost
in production. This is formula_21, or the competitive price of the arrows,
times the proportion formula_22 of arrows lost after each shot. Second, there
is the net rental or return required by the arrows' owner (who might or might
not be the same person as the hunter using it). This can be expressed as the
product formula_23, where formula_24 is the (uniform) "net rate of return" of
the system. Here formula_3 is the amount of labour directly embodied in beaver
and deer unit production, while formula_33 is the labour indirectly thus
embodied, through previous arrow production. The sum of the two, gives the
total amount of labour embodied. It is now obvious that the relative
competitive price of deer formula_12 can no longer be generally expressed as
the ratio between total amounts of labour embodied. With formula_36 the ratio
formula_37 will correspond to formula_12 only in two very special cases: if
either formula_39; or, if formula_40. In general the two ratios will not only
differ: formula_12 may change for any given formula_37, if the net rate of
return or the wages vary. As it will now be seen, this general lack of any
functional relationship from formula_37 to formula_12 ‚Äîof which Ricardo had
been particularly well aware‚Äîis at the heart of Marx's transformation
problem. Although Marx was aware that at equilibrium with no monopoly r=0. For
Marx r was a portion of surplus value. Marx‚Äôs labour theory of value. Surplus
value and exploitation. Marx distinguishes between labour power as the
potential to work, and labour, which is its actual use. He describes labour
power as a commodity, and like all commodities, Marx assumes that on average it
is exchanged at its value. Its value is determined by the value of the quantity
goods required for its reproduction. Yet, there is a difference between the
value of labour power, and the value produced by that labour power in its use.
Unlike other commodities, in its use labour power produces new value beyond
that used up by its use. This difference is called surplus value and is for
Marx the source of profit for the capitalists. The appropriation of surplus
labor is what Marx denoted as exploitation of labour. Labour as the "value-
creating substance". "Let us take two commodities, e.g., corn and iron. The
proportions in which they are exchangeable, whatever those proportions may be,
can always be represented by an equation in which a given quantity of corn is
equated to some quantity of iron: e.g., 1 quarter corn = x cwt. iron. What does
this equation tell us? It tells us that in two different things‚Äîin 1 quarter
of corn and x cwt. of iron, there exists in equal quantities something common
to both. The two things must therefore be equal to a third, which in itself is
neither the one nor the other. Each of them, so far as it is exchange value,
must therefore be reducible to this third." "This common 'something' cannot be
either a geometrical, a chemical, or any other natural property of commodities.
Such properties claim our attention only in so far as they affect the utility
of those commodities, make them use values. But the exchange of commodities is
evidently an act characterised by a total abstraction from use value." "If then
we leave out of consideration the use value of commodities, they have only one
common property left, that of being products of labour. [‚Ä¶] Along with the
useful qualities of the products themselves, we put out of sight both the
useful character of the various kinds of labour embodied in them, and the
concrete forms of that labour; there is nothing left but what is common to them
all; all are reduced to one and the same sort of labour, human labour in the
abstract." "A use value, or useful article, therefore, has value only because
human labour in the abstract has been embodied or materialised in it. How,
then, is the magnitude of this value to be measured? Plainly, by the quantity
of the value-creating substance, the labour, contained in the article."
Variable and constant capital. As labour produces in this sense more than its
own value, the direct-labour input is called variable capital and denoted as
formula_45. The amount of value which labour transmits to the deer in our
previous example, varies according to the intensity of the exploitation. In our
previous example one has formula_46. By contrast, the value of other
inputs‚Äîin our example the indirect (or ‚Äúdead‚Äù) past labour embodied in
used up arrows‚Äîis transmitted to the product as it stands, without additions.
It is hence called constant capital and denoted as "c". The value transmitted
by the arrow to the deer can never be greater than the value of the arrow
itself. In our previous example one has formula_47. Value formulas. Where
formula_49 stands for the (unit) Marxian value of beavers and deer. for all
formula_4. Transformation of values into prices. Like Ricardo, Marx knew that
"relative" labour values‚Äî formula_56 in the above example‚Äîdo not generally
tally with relative competitive prices‚Äî formula_12 in the same example.
However, in the third volume of "Capital" he argued that competitive prices
were obtained from his values through a transformation process, whereby
capitalists "redistributed" among themselves the given "aggregate" surplus
value of the system, in such a way as to bring about a tendency toward a more
equal rate of profit formula_24 between sectors of the economy. This happened
because of the capitalists' tendency to shift their capital towards the sectors
where it earned higher returns. As competition become fierce in a given sector,
the rate of return comes down, while the opposite will happen in a sector with
a low rate of return. Marx describes this process in detail in chapter 9 of
Volume III. Marx's reasoning. The two following tables adapt the deer-beaver-
arrow example already seen above (which, of course, is "not" found in Marx, and
is only a useful simplification), to illustrate Marx's approach. In both cases
it is assumed that the total quantities of beavers and deer captured are
formula_59 and formula_60 respectively. It is also supposed that the
subsistence real wage is one beaver per unit of labour, so that the amount of
labour embodied in it is formula_61. Table 1 shows how the total amount of
surplus value of the system‚Äîin the last row‚Äîis determined. Table 2 then
illustrates how Marx thought that this total would be redistributed between the
two industries, as ‚Äúprofit‚Äù at a uniform return rate "r" over constant
capital. First, the condition that total ‚Äúprofit‚Äù must equal total surplus
value ‚Äì in the last row of table 2 ‚Äì is used to determine "r". The result
is then multiplied by the value of the constant capital of each industry, to
get its ‚Äúprofit‚Äù. Finally, each (absolute) competitive price in labour
units is obtained, as the sum of constant capital, variable capital and
‚Äúprofit‚Äù per unit of output, in the last column of Table 2. Tables 1 and 2
parallel the tables in which Marx elaborated his numerical example in Chapter 9
of "Capital's" Volume III. Marx's error and its correction. Later scholars
argued that Marx's formulas for competitive prices were mistaken. First,
competitive equilibrium requires a uniform rate of return over constant capital
valued at its "price", not its Marxian value, contrary to what is done in Table
2 above. Secondly, competitive prices result from the sum of costs valued at
the "prices" of things, not as amounts of embodied labour. Thus, both Marx's
calculation of formula_24 and the sums of his price formulas do not add up in
all the normal cases, where‚Äîas in the above example‚Äîrelative competitive
prices differ from relative Marxian values. Marx noted this, but thought that
it was not significant, stating in Chapter 9 of Volume 3 of Capital that "Our
present analysis does not necessitate a closer examination of this point." The
simultaneous linear equations method of computing competitive (relative) prices
in an equilibrium economy is today very well known. In the greatly simplified
model of Tables 1 and 2, where by assumption the wages rate is given and equal
to the price of beavers, the most convenient way is to express such prices in
units of beavers, which means normalising formula_63. This immediately yields
the (relative) price of arrows as Substituting this into the relative-price
condition for beavers gives the solution for the rate of return as Finally, the
price condition for deer can hence be written as This latter result, which
gives the correct competitive price of deer in units of beavers for the simple
model used here, is generally inconsistent with Marx's price formulae of Table
2. Ernest Mandel, defending Marx, explains this discrepancy in term of the time
frame of production rather than as a logical error, i.e. in this simplified
model, capital goods are purchased at a labour value price but final products
are sold under prices which reflect redistributed surplus value. [http://
www.marxists.org/archive/mandel/19xx/marx/ch04.htm] Mathematical vs historical
transformation. Frederick Engels ‚Äì the editor of "Capital"'s Volume III ‚Äì
hinted since 1894 at a possibly alternative way to look at the whole matter.
His view was that the pure Marxian "law of value" of Volume I and the
"transformed" prices of Volume III applied to different periods of economic
history. In particular, the "law of value" would have prevailed in the pre-
capitalist exchange economies ‚Äì from Babylon to the fifteenth century of the
common era ‚Äì while the "transformed" prices would have materialized under
capitalism: see Engels' quotation by Morishima and Catephores (1975) p.¬ 310.
Engels' reasoning was later taken up by Meek (1956) and Nell (1973). These
authors argued that ‚Äì whatever one must say of his interpretation of
capitalism ‚Äì Marx's "value" theory keeps its usefulness as a tool to
interpret pre-capitalist societies, because ‚Äì they maintained ‚Äì in pre-
capitalist exchange economies there were no "prices of production" with a
uniform rate of return (or "profit") on capital. It hence follows that Marx's
transformation must have had a "historical" dimension, given by the actual
transition to capitalist production (an no more Marxian "values") at the
beginning of the modern era. Then this true "historical transformation" could
and should take the place of the mathematical transformation postulated by Marx
in Chapter 9 of Volume III. Moreover, the available quantitative research by
economic historians has "not" generally endorsed Engels' view of antiquity and
the Middle Ages as a "value epoch" in the Marxian sense: see for instance Hicks
(1969) and Godelier (1973). Other Marxist views. There are several schools of
thought among those who see themselves as upholding or furthering Marx on the
question of transformation from values to prices, or modifying his theory in
ways to make it more consistent. According to the Temporal single-system
interpretation of "Capital" advanced by Alan Freeman, Andrew Kliman and others,
Marx's writings on the subject can be interpreted in such a way as to remove
any supposed inconsistencies (Choonara, 2007). Modern traditional Marxists
argue that not only does the Labour Theory of Value hold up today, but that
Marx's understanding of the Transformation Problem was in the main also
correct. Political-economic readings of "Capital", such as Harry Cleaver's
"Reading Capital Politically" re-define exploitation as a direct control of
worked time, unrelated as such to distribution. These readings are usually
associated with the autonomist strand of Marxism, which focuses on production
as the key economic site within society. These readings of "Capital" are
typically hostile to economics as such, and consider the transformation problem
unimportant because they see all social arrangements in capitalism (in
particular, profit and distribution) as politically determined contests between
classes. The probabilistic interpretation of Marx advanced by Emmanuel Farjoun
and Moshe Machover in "Laws of Chaos" (see references). They ""dis"solve" the
transformation problem by reconceptualising the relevant quantities as random
variables. In particular, they consider profit rates to reach an equilibrium
"distribution". A heuristic analogy with the statistical mechanics of an ideal
gas leads them to the hypothesis that this equilibrium distribution should be a
gamma distribution. Finally, there are Marxist scholars (e.g., Anwar Shaikh,
Fred Moseley, Alan Freeman, Makoto Itoh, Gerard Dumenil & Dominique Levy,
Duncan Foley) who hold that there exists no incontestable logical procedure by
which to derive price magnitudes from value magnitudes, but still think that it
has no lethal consequences on his system as a whole. In a few very special
cases, Marx's idea of labour as the "substance" of (exchangeable) value would
not be openly at odds with the facts of market competitive equilibrium. These
authors have argued that such cases‚Äîthough not generally observed‚Äîthrow
light on the "hidden" or "pure" nature of capitalist society. Thus Marx's
related notions of surplus value and unpaid labour can still be treated as
"basically" true, although they hold that the practical details of their
workings are more complicated than Marx thought. In particular, some (e.g.
Anwar Shaikh) have suggested that‚Äîsince aggregate surplus value will
generally differ from aggregate "profit"‚Äîthe former should be in fact treated
as a mere "pre-condition" for the latter, rather than a full explanation of it.
Using input-output data and empirical proxies for labour-values, Anwar Shaikh &
Ochoa have provided some statistical evidence to show that, although there may
be no incontestable "logical" deduction possible of specific price magnitudes
from specific value magnitudes even within a complex model (in contrast to a
probabilistic "prediction"), even a "93% Ricardian theory" of labour-value
appears to be a better empirical predictor of price than its rivals. Critics of
the theory. Many mathematical economists assert that a set of functions in
which Marx's equalities hold does "not" generally exist at the individual
enterprise or aggregate level, so that Chapter 9's transformation problem has
no general solution, outside two classes of very special cases. This was first
pointed out by, among others, B√∂hm-Bawerk (1896) and Bortkiewicz (1906). In
the second half of the twentieth century, Leontief‚Äôs and Sraffa‚Äôs work on
linear production models provided a framework within which to prove this result
in a simple and general way. Although he never actually mentioned the
transformation problem, Sraffa‚Äôs (1960) Chapter VI on the "reduction" of
prices to "dated" amounts of current and past embodied labour gave implicitly
the first general proof, showing that the competitive price formula_68 of the
formula_69 produced good can be expressed as where formula_71 is the time lag,
formula_72 is the lagged-labour input coefficient, formula_11 is the wage and
formula_24 is the "profit" (or net return) rate. Since total embodied labour is
defined as it follows from Sraffa‚Äôs result that there is generally no
function from formula_76 to formula_68, as was made explicit and elaborated
upon by later writers, notably Ian Steedman in "Marx after Sraffa". A standard
reference ‚Äì with an extensive survey of the entire literature pre-1971 and a
comprehensive bibliography ‚Äì is Samuelson's (1971) "Understanding the Marxian
Notion of Exploitation: A Summary of the So-Called Transformation Problem
Between Marxian Values and Competitive Prices" "Journal of Economic Literature"
9 2 399‚Äì431. Since the 1970s several major schools of Marxian economics have
arisen in response to the transformation problem-related challenges of the
neoclassical and Sraffian schools. Analytical Marxists held that the
transformation problem disproved the Labour Theory of Value and based their
Marxian social theory on a combination of the Fundamental Marxian theorem, game
theory, and other neoclassical and mathematical tools. Empirical Marxists,
including Anwar Shaikh, Moshe Machover, and Paul Cockshott, maintain that since
empirical data bears out the correspondence of prices and labour values, the
transformation problem is irrelevant. Followers of the Temporal Single System
Interpretation and the New Interpretation argue that critics have misunderstood
Marx's definition of value and that, correctly defined, there is no difference
between value and price. The lack of any function to transform Marx's "values"
to competitive prices has important implications for Marx's theory of labour
exploitation and economic dynamics, namely that, some people argue, there is no
Tendency of the rate of profit to fall. This means that it is not pre-ordained
that capitalists must exploit labour to compensate for a declining rate of
profit. This implies that Marx's prophecy that worsening labour exploitation
would result in an eventual revolution against the capitalist system and the
establishment of communism is logically and mathematically false. The
mathematical proof that Marx's transformation problem has no general solution
has been formally questioned [http://www.mtholyoke.edu/~fmoseley/CRITIQUE.pdf]
by proponents of the Temporal Single System Interpretation, who argue that the
determination of prices by simultaneous linear equations (which assumes that
prices are the same at the start and end of the production period) is logically
inconsistent with the determination of value by labour time. Other Marxian
economists accept the proof, but reject its relevance for some key elements of
Marxian political economy. Still others reject Marxian economics outright, and
emphasise the politics of the assumed relations of production instead. To this
extent, the transformation problem‚Äîor rather its implications‚Äîis still
today a controversial question. Non-Marxian critiques. "Profit is therefore the
disguise of surplus value which must be removed before the real nature of
surplus value can be discovered." ("Capital" Volume III, Chapter 2) "Surplus
value is therefore the disguise of profit which must be removed before the real
nature of profit can be discovered." [Samuelson (1971) p.417 To further clarify
this point, it may be noticed that the special cases in question are also
precisely those where J.B. Clark‚Äôs old model of "aggregate" marginal
productivity holds strictly true, leading to equality between the equilibrium
levels of the real wage rate and labour's aggregate marginal product, a
hypothesis regarded as disproved by all sides during the Cambridge capital
controversy. One would thus have a "pure" state of capitalist society where
Marx's exploitation theory and its main supposed confutation were "both" true.
This remarkable result, it is maintained, leads straight to the heart of the
matter. Like Clark‚Äôs contention about the "fairness" of marginal-productivity
wages, so Marx's basic argument‚Äîfrom the "substance" of value to the concept
of exploitation‚Äîis claimed to be a set of non-analytical and non-empirical
propositions. That is why, being non-falsifiable, both theories may be found to
apply to the same formal and/or empirical object, though they are supposed to
negate each other, as Karl Popper and many others had argued. "The price of the
commodity today is equal to the sum of the 'present' values of the different
labour inputs..." (2010 [1962) p.262] Marxian reply to non-Marxian critiques.
To further clarify this point, it may be noticed that
