Transparency International Transparency International (TI) is a non-
governmental organization that monitors and publicizes corporate and political
corruption in international development. It publishes an annual Corruption
Perceptions Index, a comparative listing of corruption worldwide. The
headquarters is located in Berlin, Germany but operates through more than 70
national chapters. Defining corruption as the abuse of entrusted power for
private gain which eventually hurts everyone who depends on the integrity of
people in a position of authority, it mainly visions for a world in which
government, politics, business, civil society, and the daily lives of people
are free of corruption. Transparency International consists of more than 100
chapters – locally established, independent organisations – that fight
corruption in their respective countries. From small bribes to large-scale
looting, corruption differs from country to country. As chapters are staffed
with local experts they are ideally placed to determine the priorities and
approaches best suited to tackling corruption in their countries. This work
ranges from visiting rural communities to provide free legal support to
advising their government on policy reform. Corruption does not stop at
national borders. The chapters play a crucial role in shaping its collective
work and realising its regional and global goals, such as Strategy 2015.
Transparency International’s multi-country research and advocacy initiatives
are driven by the chapters. They also clearly state that they are
“politically non-partisan and place great importance on our independence”
meaning that no donor has any input into their policies. History. Transparency
International was founded in May 1993 through the initiative of Peter Eigen, a
former regional director for the World Bank. Founding board members included
Eigen, Hansjörg Elshorst, Joe Githongo, Fritz Heimann, Michael Hershman, Kamal
Hossain, Dolores L. Español, George Moody Stuart, Jerry Parfitt, Jeremy Pope
and Frank Vogl. Eigen acted as Chairman and Pope was Managing Director. In
1995, Transparency International developed the Corruption Perceptions Index
(CPI). The CPI ranked nations on the prevalence of corruption within each
country, based upon surveys of business people. The CPI was subsequently
published annually. It was criticized for poor methodology and unfair treatment
of developing nations, while also being praised for highlighting corruption and
embarrassing governments. In 1999, Transparency International began publishing
the Bribe Payers Index (BPI) which ranked nations according to the prevalence
that a country's multinational corporations would offer bribes. Organization
and role. "Transparency International is the global civil society organization
leading the fight against corruption. It brings people together in a powerful
worldwide coalition to end the devastating impact of corruption on men, women
and children around the world. TI's mission is to create change towards a world
free of corruption." Since 1995, Transparency International has issued an
annual Corruption Perceptions Index (CPI); it also publishes an annual Global
Corruption Report, a Global Corruption Barometer and a Bribe Payers Index.
Transparency International does not undertake investigations on single cases of
corruption or expose individual cases. It develops tools for fighting
corruption and works with other civil society organizations, companies and
governments to implement them. The goal of Transparency International is to be
non-partisan and to build coalitions against corruption. Transparency
International's biggest success has been to put the topic of corruption on the
world's agenda. International Institutions such as the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund now view corruption as one of the main obstacles
for development, whereas prior to the 1990s this topic was not broadly
discussed. Transparency International furthermore played a vital role in the
introduction of the United Nations Convention against Corruption and the OECD
Anti-Bribery Convention. Corruption Perceptions Index. The Corruption
Perceptions Index—besides the World Bank corruption index—is the most
commonly used measure for corruption in countries worldwide. To form this
index, Transparency International compiles surveys that ask businessmen and
analysts, both in and outside the countries they are analyzing, their
perceptions of how corrupt a country is. Relying on the number of actual
corruption cases would not work since laws and enforcement of laws differ
significantly from country to country. The Corruption Perceptions Index has
received criticisms over the years. The main one stems from the difficulty in
measuring corruption, which by definition happens behind the scenes. The
Corruption Perceptions Index therefore needs to rely on third-party survey
which have been criticized as potentially unreliable. Data can vary widely
depending on the public perception of a country, the completeness of the
surveys and the methodology used. The second issue is that data cannot be
compared from year to year because Transparency International uses different
methodologies and samples every year. This makes it difficult to evaluate the
result of new policies. The Corruption Perceptions Index authors replied to
these criticisms by reminding that the Corruption Perceptions Index is meant to
measure "perception" and not "reality". They argue that "perceptions matter in
their own right, since... firms and individuals take actions based on
perceptions". Competitiveness and corruption. A review of the linkages between
countries' competitiveness and the incidence of corruption was initiated at a
Transparency International workshop in Prague, November 1998 and picked-up in
the International Anti-Corruption Conference three years later. Mara Faccio
(Purdue University, USA) has issued a number of papers on this subject,
including a study entitled " “Differences between Politically Connected and
Non-Connected Firms: A Cross Country Comparison” " Critics. The Transparency
International Finland Director Jarmo Mäkinen is director of the Confederation
of Finnish Industries. He denies the conflict of interests.
