Transparency (behavior) Transparency, as used in science, engineering,
business, the humanities and in a social context more generally, implies
openness, communication, and accountability. Transparency is operating in such
a way that it is easy for others to see what actions are performed. For
example, a cashier making change at a point of sale by segregating a customer's
large bills, counting up from the sale amount, and placing the change on the
counter in such a way as to invite the customer to verify the amount of change
demonstrates transparency. Wages. In 2009, UK City minister Lord Myners
proposed that the pay and identity of up to 20 of the highest-paid employees at
British companies should be disclosed. In the UK, employees outside the
boardroom are currently granted anonymity about their pay deals. He also called
for the pay of all employees to be banded in grades. In his interim report in
July, David Walker suggested that bankers' pay levels should be disclosed in
bands and that the number of staff falling in each band be included. However,
it is unlikely in the UK that disclosure requirements will be made a legal
requirement, with hopes being placed on recommendations being undertaken
voluntarily. Regulations in Hong Kong require banks to list their top earners
– without naming them – by pay band. In Norway, tax authorities annually
release the "skatteliste" or "tax list"; official records showing the annual
income and overall wealth of nearly every taxpayer. In 2009, the Spanish
government for the first time released information on how much each cabinet
member is worth, but data on ordinary citizens is still private. Management.
Radical transparency is a management method where nearly all decision making is
carried out publicly. All draft documents, all arguments for and against a
proposal, all final decisions, and the decision making process itself are made
public and remain publicly archived. Two examples of organizations utilizing
this style are the GNU/Linux community and Indymedia. Corporate. Corporate
transparency, a form of radical transparency, is the concept of removing all
barriers to —and the facilitating of— free and easy public access to
corporate information and the laws, rules, social connivance and processes that
facilitate and protect those individuals and corporations that freely join,
develop, and improve the process. Non-governmental organizations.
Accountability and transparency are of high relevance for non-governmental
organisations (NGOs). In view of their responsibilities to stakeholders,
including donors, sponsors, programme beneficiaries, staff, states and the
public, they are considered to be of even greater importance to them than to
commercial undertakings. Yet these same values are often found to be lacking in
NGOs. The "International NGO Accountability Charter", linked to the Global
Reporting Initiative, documents the commitment of its members international
NGOs to accountability and transparency, requiring them to submit an annual
report, among others. Signed in 2006 by 11 NGOs active in the area of
humanitarian rights, the INGO Accountability Charter has been referred to as
the “first global accountability charter for the non-profit sector”. In
1997, the One World Trust created an "NGO Charter", a code of conduct
comprising commitment to accountability and transparency. Media. Media
Transparency is the concept of determining how and why information is conveyed
through various means. If the media and the public knows everything that
happens in all authorities and county administrations there will be a lot of
questions, protests and suggestions coming from media and the public. People
who are interested in a certain issue will try to influence the decisions.
Transparency creates an everyday participation in the political processes by
media and the public. One tool used to increase everyday participation in
political processes is Freedom of Information legislation and requests. Modern
democracy builds on such participation of the people and media. There are, for
anybody who is interested, many ways to influence the decisions at all levels
in society. Politics. In politics, transparency is used as a means of holding
public officials accountable and fighting corruption. When a government's
meetings are open to the press and the public, its budgets may be reviewed by
anyone, and its laws and decisions are open to discussion, it is seen as
transparent, and there is less opportunity for the authorities to abuse the
system for their own interests. When military authorities classify their plans
as secret, transparency is absent. This can be seen as either positive or
negative; positive because it can increase national security, negative because
it can lead to corruption and, in extreme cases, a military dictatorship. While
a liberal democracy can be a plutocracy, where decisions are made behind locked
doors and the people have fewer possibilities to influence politics between the
elections, a participative democracy is more closely connected to the will of
the people. Participative democracy, built on transparency and everyday
participation, has been used officially in northern Europe for decades. In the
northern European country Sweden, public access to government documents became
a law as early as 1766. It has officially been adopted as an ideal to strive
for by the rest of EU. To promote transparency in politics, Hans Peter Martin,
Paul van Buitenen (Europa Transparant) and Ashley Mote decided to cooperate
under the name Platform for Transparency (PfT) in 2005. Similar organizations
that promotes transparency are Transparency International and the Sunlight
Foundation. A recent political movement to emerge in conjunction with the
demands for transparency is the Pirate Party, a label for a number of political
parties across different countries who advocate freedom of information, direct
democracy, network neutrality, and the free sharing of knowledge. Online
Culture. 21st Century Culture affords a higher level of public transparency
than ever before, and actually requires it in many cases. People no longer have
a high level of control over what is public information. Modern technology and
associated culture shifts have changed how government works (see wikileaks),
what information people can find out about each other, and the ability of
politicians to stay in office if they are involved in sex scandals. This is
particularly interesting for mental health professionals, whose clients can now
find out their sexual orientation, home address, and many other pieces of
personal information online (see digital divide for more info). Research.
Scholarly research in any academic discipline may also be labeled as (partly)
transparent (or open research) if some or all relevant aspects of the research
are open in the sense of open source, open access and open data, thereby
facilitating social recognition and accountability of the scholars who did the
research and replication by others interested in the matters addressed by it.
Some mathematicians and scientists are critical of using closed source
mathematical software such as Mathematica for mathematical proofs, because
these do not provide transparency, and thus are not verifiable. Open-source
software such as Sage aims to solve this problem. Technology. In the computer
software world, open source software concerns the creation of software, to
which access to the underlying source code is freely available. This permits
use, study, and modification without restriction. In computer security, the
debate is ongoing as to the relative merits of the full disclosure of security
vulnerabilities, versus a security-by-obscurity approach. Sports. Sports has
become a global business over the last century, and here, too, initiatives
ranging from mandatory drug testing to the fighting of sports-related
corruption are gaining ground based on the transparent activities in other
domains. Criticism. Among philosophical and literary works that have examined
the idea of transparency are Michel Foucault's Discipline and Punish or David
Brin's The Transparent Society. The German philosopher and media theorist
Byung-Chul Han in his 2012 work "Transparenzgesellschaft" sees transparency as
a cultural norm created by neoliberal market forces, which he understands as
the insatiable drive toward voluntary disclosure bordering on the pornographic.
According to Han, the dictates of transparency enforce a totalitarian system of
openness at the expense of other social values such as shame, secrecy, and
trust.
