Transfer pricing Transfer pricing refers to the setting, analysis,
documentation, and adjustment of charges made between related parties for
goods, services, or use of property (including intangible property). Transfer
prices among components of an enterprise may be used to reflect allocation of
resources among such components, or for other purposes. OECD Transfer Pricing
Guidelines state, “Transfer prices are significant for both taxpayers and tax
administrations because they determine in large part the income and expenses,
and therefore taxable profits, of associated enterprises in different tax
jurisdictions.” Over 60 governments have adopted transfer pricing rules.
Transfer pricing rules in most countries are based on what is referred to as
the “arm’s length principle” – that is to establish transfer prices
based on analysis of pricing in comparable transactions between two or more
unrelated parties dealing at arm’s length. The OECD has published guidelines
based on the arm's length principle, which are followed, in whole or in part,
by many of its member countries in adopting rules. The United States and
Canadian rules are similar in many respects to the OECD guidelines, with
certain points of material difference. A few countries, such as Brazil and
Kazakhstan, follow rules that are materially different overall. The rules of
nearly all countries permit related parties to set prices in any manner, but
permit the tax authorities to adjust those prices where the prices charged are
outside an arm's length range. Rules are generally provided for determining
what constitutes such arm's length prices, and how any analysis should proceed.
Prices actually charged are compared to prices or measures of profitability for
unrelated transactions and parties. The rules generally require that market
level, functions, risks, and terms of sale of unrelated party transactions or
activities be reasonably comparable to such items with respect to the related
party transactions or profitability being tested. Most systems allow use of
multiple methods, where appropriate and supported by reliable data, to test
related party prices. Among the commonly used methods are comparable
uncontrolled prices, cost-plus, resale price or markup, and profitability based
methods. Many systems differentiate methods of testing goods from those for
services or use of property due to inherent differences in business aspects of
such broad types of transactions. Some systems provide mechanisms for sharing
or allocation of costs of acquiring assets (including intangible assets) among
related parties in a manner designed to reduce tax controversy. Most tax
treaties and many tax systems provide mechanisms for resolving disputes among
taxpayers and governments in a manner designed to reduce the potential for
double taxation. Many systems also permit advance agreement between taxpayers
and one or more governments regarding mechanisms for setting related party
prices. Many systems impose penalties where the tax authority has adjusted
related party prices. Some tax systems provide that taxpayers may avoid such
penalties by preparing documentation in advance regarding prices charged
between the taxpayer and related parties. Some systems require that such
documentation be prepared in advance in all cases. Economic theory. The
discussion in this section explains an economic theory behind optimal transfer
pricing with "optimal" defined as transfer pricing that maximizes overall firm
profits in a non-realistic world with no taxes, no capital risk, no development
risk, no externalities or any other frictions which exist in the real world. In
practice a great many factors influence the transfer prices that are used by
multinational corporations, including performance measurement, capabilities of
accounting systems, import quotas, customs duties, VAT, taxes on profits, and
(in many cases) simple lack of attention to the pricing. From marginal price
determination theory, the optimum level of output is that where marginal cost
equals marginal revenue. That is to say, a firm should expand its output as
long as the marginal revenue from additional sales is greater than their
marginal costs. In the diagram that follows, this intersection is represented
by point A, which will yield a price of P*, given the demand at point B. When a
firm is selling some of its product to itself, and only to itself (i.e. there
is no external market for that particular transfer good), then the picture gets
more complicated, but the outcome remains the same. The demand curve remains
the same. The optimum price and quantity remain the same. But marginal cost of
production can be separated from the firm's total marginal costs. Likewise, the
marginal revenue associated with the production division can be separated from
the marginal revenue for the total firm. This is referred to as the Net
Marginal Revenue in production (NMR) and is calculated as the marginal revenue
from the firm minus the marginal costs of distribution. It can be shown
algebraically that the intersection of the firm's marginal cost curve and
marginal revenue curve (point A) must occur at the same quantity as the
intersection of the production division's marginal cost curve with the net
marginal revenue from production (point C). If the production division is able
to sell the transfer good in a competitive market (as well as internally), then
again both must operate where their marginal costs equal their marginal
revenue, for profit maximization. Because the external market is competitive,
the firm is a price taker and must accept the transfer price determined by
market forces (their marginal revenue from transfer and demand for transfer
products becomes the transfer price). If the market price is relatively high
(as in Ptr1 in the next diagram), then the firm will experience an internal
surplus (excess internal supply) equal to the amount Qt1 minus Qf1. The actual
marginal cost curve is defined by points A,C,D. If the firm is able to sell its
transfer goods in an imperfect market, then it need not be a price taker. There
are two markets each with its own price (Pf and Pt in the next diagram). The
aggregate market is constructed from the first two. That is, point C is a
horizontal summation of points A and B (and likewise for all other points on
the Net Marginal Revenue curve (NMRa)). The total optimum quantity (Q) is the
sum of Qf plus Qt. General tax principles. Commonly controlled taxpayers often
determine prices charged between such taxpayers based in part on the tax
effects, seeking to reduce overall taxation of the group. OECD Guidelines
state, at 1.2, “When independent enterprises deal with each other, the
conditions of their commercial and financial relations (e.g., the price of
goods transferred or services provided and the conditions of the transfer or
provision) ordinarily are determined by market forces. When associated
enterprises deal with each other, their commercial and financial relations may
not be directly affected by external market forces in the same way.”
Recognizing this, most national and some sub-national income tax authorities
have the legal authority to adjust prices charged between related parties. Tax
rules generally permit related parties to set prices in any manner they choose,
but permit adjustment where such prices or their effects are outside
guidelines. Transfer pricing rules vary by country. Most countries have an
appeals process whereby a taxpayer may contest such adjustments. Some
jurisdictions, including Canada and the United States, require extensive
reporting of transactions and prices, and India requires third party
certification of compliance with transfer pricing rules. History. Transfer
pricing adjustments have been a feature of many tax systems since the 1930s.
Both the U.S. and the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
(OECD, of which the U.S. and most major industrial countries are members) had
some guidelines by 1979. The United States led the development of detailed,
comprehensive transfer pricing guidelines with a White Paper in 1988 and
proposals in 1990-1992, which ultimately became regulations in 1994. In 1995,
the OECD issued the first draft of current guidelines, which it expanded in
1996. The two sets of guidelines are broadly similar and contain certain
principles followed by many countries. The OECD guidelines have been formally
adopted by many European Union countries with little or no modification. The
OECD and U.S. systems provide that prices may be set by the component members
of an enterprise in any manner, but may be adjusted to conform to an arm's
length standard. Each system provides for several approved methods of testing
prices, and allows the government to adjust prices to the midpoint of an arm's
length range. Both systems provide for standards for comparing third party
transactions or other measures to tested prices, based on comparability and
reliability criteria. Significant exceptions are noted below. Government
authority to adjust prices. Most governments have granted authorization to
their tax authorities to adjust prices charged between related parties. Many
such authorizations, including those of the United States, United Kingdom,
Canada, and Germany, allow domestic as well as international adjustments. Some
authorizations apply only internationally. Most, if not all, governments permit
adjustments by the tax authority even where there is no intent to avoid or
evade tax. Adjustment of prices is generally made by adjusting taxable income
of all involved related parties within the jurisdiction, as well as adjusting
any withholding or other taxes imposed on parties outside the jurisdiction.
Such adjustments generally are made after filing of tax returns. For example,
if Bigco US charges Bigco Germany for a machine, either the U.S. or German tax
authorities may adjust the price upon examination of the respective tax return.
Following an adjustment, the taxpayer generally is allowed (at least by the
adjusting government) to make payments to reflect the adjusted prices. Most
rules require that the tax authorities consider actual transactions between
parties, and permit adjustment only to actual transactions. Multiple
transactions may be aggregated or tested separately, and testing may use
multiple year data. In addition, transactions whose economic substance differs
materially from their form may be recharacterized under the laws of many
systems to follow the economic substance. Arm's length standard. Nearly all
systems require that prices be tested using an "arm's length" standard. Under
this approach, a price is considered appropriate if it is within a range of
prices that would be charged by independent parties dealing at arm's length.
This is generally defined as a price that an independent buyer would pay an
independent seller for an identical item under identical terms and conditions,
where neither is under any compulsion to act. There are clear practical
difficulties in implementing the arm's length standard. For items other than
goods, there are rarely identical items. Terms of sale may vary from
transaction to transaction. Market and other conditions may vary geographically
or over time. Some systems give a preference to certain transactional methods
over other methods for testing prices. In addition, most systems recognize that
an arm's length price may not be a particular price point but rather a range of
prices. Some systems provide measures for evaluating whether a price within
such range is considered arm's length, such as the "interquartile range" used
in U.S. regulations. Significant deviation among points in the range may
indicate lack of reliability of data. Reliability is generally considered to be
improved by use of multiple year data. Comparability. Nature of property or
services. Comparability is best achieved where identical items are compared.
However, in some cases it is possible to make reliable adjustments for
differences in the particular items, such as differences in features or
quality. For example, gold prices might be adjusted based on the weight of the
actual gold (one ounce of 10 carat gold would be half the price of one ounce of
20 carat gold). Terms of sale. Manner and terms of sale may have a material
impact on price. For example, buyers will pay more if they can defer payment
and buy in smaller quantities. Terms that may impact price include payment
timing, warranty, volume discounts, duration of rights to use of the product,
form of consideration, etc. Market level, economic conditions and geography.
Goods, services, or property may be provided to different levels of buyers or
users: producer to wholesaler, wholesaler to wholesaler, wholesaler to
retailer, or for ultimate consumption. Market conditions, and thus prices, vary
greatly at these levels. In addition, prices may vary greatly between different
economies or geographies. For example, a head of cauliflower at a retail market
will command a vastly different price in unelectrified rural India than in
Tokyo. Buyers or sellers may have different market shares that allow them to
achieve volume discounts or exert sufficient pressure on the other party to
lower prices. Where prices are to be compared, the putative comparables must be
at the same market level, within the same or similar economic and geographic
environments, and under the same or similar conditions. Testing of prices. Tax
authorities generally examine prices actually charged between related parties
to determine whether adjustments are appropriate. Such examination is by
comparison (testing) of such prices to comparable prices charged among
unrelated parties. Such testing may occur only on examination of tax returns by
the tax authority, or taxpayers may be required to conduct such testing
themselves in advance or filing tax returns. Such testing requires a
determination of how the testing must be conducted, referred to as a transfer
pricing method. Best method rule. Some systems give preference to a specific
method of testing prices. OECD and U.S. systems, however, provide that the
method used to test the appropriateness of related party prices should be that
method that produces the most reliable measure of arm's length results. This is
often known as a "best method" rule. Under this approach, the system may
require that more than one testing method be considered. Factors to be
considered include comparability of tested and independent items, reliability
of available data and assumptions under the method, and validation of the
results of the method by other methods. Comparable uncontrolled price (CUP).
Most systems consider a third party price for identical goods, services, or
property under identical conditions, called a comparable uncontrolled price
(CUP), to be the most reliable indicator of an arm's length price. All systems
permit testing using this method, but it is not always applicable. Further, it
may be possible to reliably adjust CUPs where the goods, services, or property
are identical but the sales terms or other limited items are different. As an
example, an interest adjustment could be applied where the only difference in
sales transactions is time for payment (e.g., 30 days vs. 60 days). CUPs are
based on actual transactions. For commodities, actual transactions of other
parties may be reported in a reliable manner. For other items, "in-house"
comparables, i.e., transactions of one of the controlled parties with third
parties, may be the only available reliable data. Profitability methods. CPM
and TNMM have a practical advantage in ease of implementation. Both methods
rely on microeconomic analysis of data rather than specific transactions. These
methods are discussed further with respect to the U.S. and OECD systems. Two
methods are often provided for splitting profits: comparable profit split and
residual profit split. The former requires that profit split be derived from
the combined operating profit of uncontrolled taxpayers whose transactions and
activities are comparable to the transactions and activities being tested. The
residual profit split method requires a two step process: first profits are
allocated to routine operations, then the residual profit is allocated based on
nonroutine contributions of the parties. The residual allocation may be based
on external market benchmarks or estimation based on capitalised costs. Tested
party & profit level indicator. Where testing of prices occurs on other than a
purely transactional basis, such as CPM or TNMM, it may be necessary to
determine which of the two related parties should be tested. Testing is to be
done of that party testing of which will produce the most reliable results.
Generally, this means that the tested party is that party with the most easily
compared functions and risks. Comparing the tested party's results to those of
comparable parties may require adjustments to results of the tested party or
the comparables for such items as levels of inventory or receivables. Testing
requires determination of what indication of profitability should be used. This
may be net profit on the transaction, return on assets employed, or some other
measure. Reliability is generally improved for TNMM and CPM by using a range of
results and multiple year data. Intangible property issues. Valuable intangible
property tends to be unique. Often there are no comparable items. The value
added by use of intangibles may be represented in prices of goods or services,
or by payment of fees (royalties) for use of the intangible property. Licensing
of intangibles thus presents difficulties in identifying comparable items for
testing. However, where the same property is licensed to independent parties,
such license may provide comparable transactional prices. The profit split
method specifically attempts to take value of intangibles into account.
Services. Enterprises may engage related or unrelated parties to provide
services they need. Where the required services are available within a
multinational group, there may be significant advantages to the enterprise as a
whole for components of the group to perform those services. Two issues exist
with respect to charges between related parties for services: whether services
were actually performed which warrant payment, and the price charged for such
services. Tax authorities in most major countries have, either formally or in
practice, incorporated these queries into their examination of related party
services transactions. There may be tax advantages obtained for the group if
one member charges another member for services, even where the member bearing
the charge derives no benefit. To combat this, the rules of most systems allow
the tax authorities to challenge whether the services allegedly performed
actually benefit the member charged. The inquiry may focus on whether services
were indeed performed as well as who benefited from the services. For this
purpose, some rules differentiate stewardship services from other services.
Stewardship services are generally those that an investor would incur for its
own benefit in managing its investments. Charges to the investee for such
services are generally inappropriate. Where services were not performed or
where the related party bearing the charge derived no direct benefit, tax
authorities may disallow the charge altogether. Where the services were
performed and provided benefit for the related party bearing a charge for such
services, tax rules also permit adjustment to the price charged. Rules for
testing prices of services may differ somewhat from rules for testing prices
charged for goods due to the inherent differences between provision of services
and sale of goods. The OECD Guidelines provide that the provisions relating to
goods should be applied with minor modifications and additional considerations.
In the U.S., a different set of price testing methods is provided for services.
In both cases, standards of comparability and other matters apply to both goods
and services. It is common for enterprises to perform services for themselves
(or for their components) that support their primary business. Examples include
accounting, legal, and computer services for those enterprises not engaged in
the business of providing such services. Transfer pricing rules recognize that
it may be inappropriate for a component of an enterprise performing such
services for another component to earn a profit on such services. Testing of
prices charged in such case may be referred to a cost of services or services
cost method. Application of this method may be limited under the rules of
certain countries, and is required in some countries e.g. Canada. Where
services performed are of a nature performed by the enterprise (or the
performing or receiving component) as a key aspect of its business, OECD and
U.S. rules provide that some level of profit is appropriate to the service
performing component. Canada's rules do not permit such profit. Testing of
prices in such cases generally follows one of the methods described above for
goods. The cost-plus method, in particular, may be favored by tax authorities
and taxpayers due to ease of administration. Cost sharing. Multi-component
enterprises may find significant business advantage to sharing the costs of
developing or acquiring certain assets, particularly intangible assets.
Detailed U.S. rules provide that members of a group may enter into a cost
sharing agreement (CSA) with respect to costs and benefits from the development
of intangible assets. OECD Guidelines provide more generalized suggestions to
tax authorities for enforcement related to cost contribution agreements (CCAs)
with respect to acquisition of various types of assets. Both sets of rules
generally provide that costs should be allocated among members based on
respective anticipated benefits. Inter-member charges should then be made so
that each member bears only its share of such allocated costs. Since the
allocations must inherently be made based on expectations of future events, the
mechanism for allocation must provide for prospective adjustments where prior
projections of events have proved incorrect. However, both sets of rules
generally prohibit applying hindsight in making allocations. A key requirement
to limit adjustments related to costs of developing intangible assets is that
there must be a written agreement in place among the members. Tax rules may
impose additional contractual, documentation, accounting, and reporting
requirements on participants of a CSA or CCA, which vary by country. Generally,
under a CSA or CCA, each participating member must be entitled to use of some
portion rights developed pursuant to the agreement without further payments.
Thus, a CCA participant should be entitled to use a process developed under the
CCA without payment of royalties. Ownership of the rights need not be
transferred to the participants. The division of rights is generally to be
based on some observable measure, such as by geography. Participants in CSAs
and CCAs may contribute pre-existing assets or rights for use in the
development of assets. Such contribution may be referred to as a platform
contribution. Such contribution is generally considered a deemed payment by the
contributing member, and is itself subject to transfer pricing rules or special
CSA rules. A key consideration in a CSA or CCA is what costs development or
acquisition costs should be subject to the agreement. This may be specified
under the agreement, but is also subject to adjustment by tax authorities. In
determining reasonably anticipated benefits, participants are forced to make
projections of future events. Such projections are inherently uncertain.
Further, there may exist uncertainty as to how such benefits should be
measured. One manner of determining such anticipated benefits is to project
respective sales or gross margins of participants, measured in a common
currency, or sales in units. Both sets of rules recognize that participants may
enter or leave a CSA or CCA. Upon such events, the rules require that members
make buy-in or buy-out payments. Such payments may be required to represent the
market value of the existing state of development, or may be computed under
cost recovery or market capitalization models. Penalties & documentation. Some
jurisdictions impose significant penalties relating to transfer pricing
adjustments by tax authorities. These penalties may have thresholds for the
basic imposition of penalty, and the penalty may be increased at other
thresholds. For example, U.S. rules impose a 20% penalty where the adjustment
exceeds USD 5 million, increased to 40% of the additional tax where the
adjustment exceeds USD 20 million. The rules of many countries require
taxpayers to document that prices charged are within the prices permitted under
the transfer pricing rules. Where such documentation is not timely prepared,
penalties may be imposed, as above. Documentation may be required to be in
place prior to filing a tax return in order to avoid these penalties.
Documentation by a taxpayer need not be relied upon by the tax authority in any
jurisdiction permitting adjustment of prices. Some systems allow the tax
authority to disregard information not timely provided by taxpayers, including
such advance documentation. India requires that documentation not only be in
place prior to filing a return, but also that the documentation be certified by
the chartered accountant preparing a company return. U.S. specific tax rules.
U.S. transfer pricing rules are lengthy. They incorporate all of the principles
above, using CPM (see below) instead of TNMM. U.S. rules specifically provide
that a taxpayer's intent to avoid or evade tax is not a prerequisite to
adjustment by the Internal Revenue Service, nor are nonrecognition provisions.
The U.S. rules give no priority to any particular method of testing prices,
requiring instead explicit analysis to determine the best method. U.S.
comparability standards limit use of adjustments for business strategies in
testing prices to clearly defined market share strategies, but permit limited
consideration of location savings. Comparable profits method. The Comparable
Profits method (CPM) was introduced in the 1992 proposed regulations and has
been a prominent feature of IRS transfer pricing practice since. Under CPM, the
tested party's overall results, rather than its transactions, are compared with
the overall results of similarly situated enterprises for whom reliable data is
available. Comparisons are made for the profit level indicator that most
reliably represents profitability for the type of business. For example, a
sales company's profitability may be most reliably measured as a return on
sales (pre-tax profit as a percent of sales). CPM inherently requires lower
levels of comparability in the nature of the goods or services. Further, data
used for CPM generally can be readily obtained in the U.S. and many countries
through public filings of comparable enterprises. Results of the tested party
or comparable enterprises may require adjustment to achieve comparability. Such
adjustments may include effective interest adjustments for customer financing
or debt levels, inventory adjustments, etc. Cost plus and resale price issues.
U.S. rules apply resale price method and cost-plus with respect to goods
strictly on a transactional basis. Thus, comparable transactions must be found
for all tested transactions in order to apply these method. Industry averages
or statistical measures are not permitted. Where a manufacturing entity
provides contract manufacturing for both related and unrelated parties, it may
readily have reliable data on comparable transactions. However, absent such in-
house comparables, it is often difficult to obtain reliable data for applying
cost-plus. The rules on services expand cost-plus, providing an additional
option to mitigate these data problems. Charges to related parties for services
not in the primary business of either the tested party or the related party
group are rebuttably presumed to be arm's length if priced at cost plus zero
(the services cost method). Such services may include back-room operations
(e.g., accounting and data processing services for groups not engaged in
providing such services to clients), product testing, or a variety of such non-
integral services. This method is not permitted for manufacturing, reselling,
and certain other services that typically are integral to a business. U.S.
rules also specifically permit shared services agreements. Under such
agreements, various group members may perform services which benefit more than
one member. Prices charged are considered arm's length where the costs are
allocated in a consistent manner among the members based on reasonably
anticipated benefits. For instance, shared services costs may be allocated
among members based on a formula involving expected or actual sales or a
combination of factors. Terms between parties. Under U.S. rules, actual conduct
of the parties is more important than contractual terms. Where the conduct of
the parties differs from terms of the contract, the IRS has authority to deem
the actual terms to be those needed to permit the actual conduct. Adjustments.
U.S. rules require that the IRS may not adjust prices found to be within the
arm's length range. Where prices charged are outside that range, prices may be
adjusted by the IRS unilaterally to the midpoint of the range. The burden of
proof that a transfer pricing adjustment by the IRS is incorrect is on the
taxpayer unless the IRS adjustment is shown to be arbitrary and capricious.
However, the courts have generally required that both taxpayers and the IRS to
demonstrate their facts where agreement is not reached. Documentation and
penalties. If the IRS adjusts prices by more than $5 million or a percentage
threshold, penalties apply. The penalty is 20% of the amount of the tax
adjustment, increased to 40% at a higher threshold. This penalty may be avoided
only if the taxpayer maintains contemporaneous documentation meeting
requirements in the regulations, and provides such documentation to the IRS
within 30 days of IRS request. If documentation is not provided at all, the IRS
may make adjustments based on any information it has available. Contemporaneous
means the documentation existed with 30 days of filing the taxpayer's tax
return. Documentation requirements are quite specific, and generally require a
best method analysis and detailed support for the pricing and methodology used
for testing such pricing. To qualify, the documentation must reasonably support
the prices used in computing tax. Commensurate with income standard. U.S. tax
law requires that the foreign transferee/user of intangible property (patents,
processes, trademarks, know-how, etc.) will be deemed to pay to a controlling
transferor/developer a royalty commensurate with the income derived from using
the intangible property. This applies whether such royalty is actually paid or
not. This requirement may result in withholding tax on deemed payments for use
of intangible property in the U.S. OECD specific tax rules. OECD guidelines are
voluntary for member nations. Some nations have adopted the guidelines almost
unchanged. Terminology may vary between adopting nations, and may vary from
that used above. OECD guidelines give priority to transactional methods,
described as the “most direct way” to establish comparability. The
Transactional Net Margin Method and Profit Split methods are used either as
methods of last resort or where traditional transactional methods cannot be
reliably applied. CUP is not given priority among transactional methods in OECD
guidelines. The Guidelines state, "It may be difficult to find a transaction
between independent enterprises that is similar enough to a controlled
transaction such that no differences have a material effect on price." Thus,
adjustments are often required to either tested prices or uncontrolled process.
Comparability standards. OECD rules permit consideration of business strategies
in determining if results or transactions are comparable. Such strategies
include market penetration, expansion of market share, cost or location
savings, etc. Transactional net margin method. The transactional net margin
method (TNMM) compares the net profitability of a transaction, or group or
aggregation of transactions, to that of another transaction, group or
aggregation. Under TNMM, use of actual, verifiable transactions is given strong
preference. However, in practice TNMM allows making computations for company-
level aggregates of transactions. Thus, TNMM may in some circumstances function
like U.S. CPM. Terms. Contractual terms and transactions between parties are to
be respected under OECD rules unless both the substance of the transactions
differs materially from those terms and following such terms would impede tax
administration. Adjustments. OECD rules generally do not permit tax authorities
to make adjustments if prices charged between related parties are within the
arm's length range. Where prices are outside such range, the prices may be
adjusted to the most appropriate point. The burden of proof of the
appropriateness of an adjustment is generally on the tax authority.
Documentation. OECD Guidelines do not provide specific rules on the nature of
taxpayer documentation. Such matters are left to individual member nations.
China specific tax rules. Documentation. Under the Circular, taxpayers must
disclose related party transactions when filing tax returns. In addition, the
circular provides for a three-tier set of documentation and reporting
standards, based on the aggregate amount of intercompany transactions.
Taxpayers affected by the rules who engaged in intercompany transactions under
RMB 20 million for the year were generally exempted from reporting,
documentation, and penalties. Those with transactions exceeding RMB 200 million
generally were required to complete transfer pricing studies in advance of
filing tax returns. For taxpayers in the top tier, documentation must include a
comparability analysis and justification for the transfer pricing method
chosen. General principles. Chinese transfer pricing rules apply to
transactions between a Chinese business and domestic and foreign related
parties. A related party includes enterprises meeting one of eight different
tests, including 25% equity ownership in common, overlapping boards or
management, significant debt holdings, and other tests. Transactions subject to
the guidelines include most sorts of dealings businesses may have with one
another. The Circular instructs field examiners to review taxpayer's
comparability and method analyses. The method of analyzing comparability and
what factors are to be considered varies slightly by type of transfer pricing
analysis method. The guidelines for CUP include specific functions and risks to
be analyzed for each type of transaction (goods, rentals, licensing, financing,
and services). The guidelines for resale price, cost-plus, transactional net
margin method, and profit split are short and very general. Cost sharing. The
China rules provide a general framework for cost sharing agreements. This
includes a basic structure for agreements, provision for buy-in and exit
payments based on reasonable amounts, minimum operating period of 20 years, and
mandatory notification of the SAT within 30 days of concluding the agreement.
Agreements between taxpayers and governments and dispute resolution. Tax
authorities of most major countries have entered into unilateral or
multilateral agreements between taxpayers and other governments regarding the
setting or testing of related party prices. These agreements are referred to as
advance pricing agreements or advance pricing arrangements (APAs). Under an
APA, the taxpayer and one or more governments agree on the methodology used to
test prices. APAs are generally based on transfer pricing documentation
prepared by the taxpayer and presented to the government(s). Multilateral
agreements require negotiations between the governments, conducted through
their designated competent authority groups. The agreements are generally for
some period of years, and may have retroactive effect. Most such agreements are
not subject to public disclosure rules. Rules controlling how and when a
taxpayer or tax authority may commence APA proceedings vary by jurisdiction.
Reading & overall reference list. Major international accounting and law firms
have published summaries of the guidelines. See their web sites.
