Tree spiking Tree spiking involves hammering a metal rod, nail, or other
material (commonly ceramic) into a tree trunk, strategically inserting it at
the base of the trunk where a logger might be expected to cut into the tree. It
is an unconventional tactic, used to discourage logging by creating a mantrap
which may injure or kill lumberjacks who attempt to cut down the tree or mill
workers who process the wood. Furthermore, the presence of the spike reduces
the commercial value of the wood, thereby reducing the economic viability of
logging in the long term, while not threatening the life of the tree. It is
believed that tree spiking originated in timber logging labor disputes in the
Pacific Northwest of the United States in the late 19th century. It came to
prominence as a contentious tactic within unconventional environmentalist
circles during the 1980s, after it was advocated by Earth First! co-founder
Dave Foreman in his book "Ecodefense". In the book, he discusses how to do it
and how to avoid risks to the activist and the logger. One injury possibly from
tree spiking occurred in the United States in 1987. California mill worker
George Alexander was seriously injured when the bandsaw he was operating was
shattered by either an old nail or a tree spike. This led many progressive
Earth First! groups to denounce tree spiking. Other activists were led to
either reject this form of sabotage entirely, or take some precautions, such as
putting warning signs in the area where the trees are being spiked. Tree
spiking is condemned by opponents as eco-terrorism as they claim it is
potentially dangerous to loggers or mill-workers, although only this one injury
possibly resulting from tree spiking has been widely reported. New Zealand.
Beech trees that were being logged in 1998 in the Tuatapere area were spiked.
Police were unable to trace those who were responsible. Pat O'Dea, while he was
the mayor for the Buller District, suggested in 2000 that Native Forest Action
(NFA) had spiked trees during a direct action campaign against native forest
logging on the West Coast. This was denied by NFA spokesperson Dean Bagient-
Mercer. In 1998 Kevin Smith from Forest and Bird had said that tree spiking was
proposed by some individuals involved in the NFA campaign. United States.
Following the 1987 injury of California mill worker George Alexander, tree
spiking was declared a federal felony in the United States in 1988. (18 U.S.
Code 1864). In 1990, Earth First! leader Judi Bari led activists in Northern
California and Southern Oregon to renounce tree-spiking as a tactic on the eve
of Redwood Summer, a 1990 campaign of nonviolent protests against logging of
the redwood forest. Tree spiking in fiction. Derek Hansen in his 1998 novel
"Blockade" has the protagonist, a logging company operator, ordering the
spiking of trees in order to discredit the anti-logging activists. "": Anti-
logging activists sabotage a tree by spiking it, breaking the blade on a
logger’s chainsaw and cutting him. The genetically enhanced tree sap mixes
with the logger’s blood, starting a chain reaction of zombie mayhem.
"Darkness Falls" ("The X-Files"): Two environmentalist "monkey wrenchers" are
accused of spiking trees in a Washington state forest. "The Anarchist
Cookbook": In this film the antagonist Johnny Black plans on spiking redwood
trees in an attempt to prevent logging. The comic series "Concrete," by Paul
Chadwick, dedicated a multi-part story called "Think Like a Mountain" to the
subject of tree spiking. A group of radical environmentalists engage in tree-
spiking in the novel "Hayduke Lives!" by Edward Abbey. In the young adult novel
"Spirit of the Rainforest" by Eric Wilson, young protagonist Tom Austen takes
part in a protest against logging a rainforest but the protest is broken when a
more radical character spikes a tree, angering non violent protesters. In the
1991 "L. A. Law" episode "Do the Spike Thing", a mill worker sues a logging
company and a radical environmentalist group when he is injured by a saw blade
that breaks upon striking a spike.
