Tree sitting Tree sitting is a form of environmentalist civil disobedience in
which a protester sits in a tree, usually on a small platform built for the
purpose, to protect it from being cut down (speculating that loggers will not
endanger human lives by cutting an occupied tree). Supporters usually provide
the tree sitters with food and other supplies. Tree sitters have successfully
prevented logging of ancient old-growth forests for months at a time, and in
some instances have convinced logging companies not to cut trees in some areas.
Sometimes, tree sitting is used as a long-term resistance strategy, with
activists occupying trees for months or years at a time. On the other hand,
tree sitting is often used as a stalling tactic, to prevent the cutting of
trees while lawyers fight in the courts to secure the long-term victories. When
tree sitting occurs on private land, it is considered by some to be an act of
trespassing. Some activists stand up to this charge in court, claiming a
necessity defense – that the harm done by trespassing is negligible compared
to the potential harm to the environment caused by the proposed logging.
Sometimes logging companies will hire tree climbers to remove trespassers
sitting in trees. Although it's argued that it is the companies' legal right to
do so, some tree sitters are suing Pacific Lumber to challenge this practice.
Most tree sitting in California occurs on private land. In Oregon, where there
are more logging projects on public land (National Forests and BLM lands), tree
sitting is usually not trespassing but tree sitters can be fined for violating
closure orders or camping limits, or for erecting illegal structures.
Extractions. Tree-sitters in trees claimed by Pacific Lumber in Humboldt County
have been subject to forced removal by hired tree-sit extractors. The practice
started with a single extractor in the late 90’s but in 2003 Pacific Lumber
hired teams of climbers to remove dozens of tree-sitters, particularly in the
Freshwater area East of Eureka, California. The extractors are not actually
deputized but police often show up to assist extractors and arrest tree-
sitters. On March 17, 2003, more than 30 police arrived and enforced the
closure of a public road to assist in the removal of two long-time tree-sitters
from old-growth redwoods. Most of the extractions in Northern California are
done under the leadership of Eric Schatz of Schatz Tree Service, a well known
professional arborist. Schatz testified in court that he has removed 42 tree
sitters from trees. Tree villages. A tree village is an extension of the tree
sit/tree house protest, involving several more tree houses. The "Fall Creek/Red
Cloud Thunder Tree-Village" was a long running example. It was a 6-year
occupation of a small timber sale in the Willamette National Forest at Fall
Creek Oregon US which ran from February 1998 to November 2003. It comprised
seven houses of up to 5 occupants each tied together with rope 'traverses' high
and up to between 'platforms'. This tree village was designed to be totally
self-sufficient with composting toilets, solar/wind power, communications,
cargo lines between ground and other sits, individual rappel lines and
hydroponic sprout farms. An estimated 1000 activists occupied the trees at
various times. The forest occupied during the Fall Creek campaign remains uncut
to this day. "Winberry Tree Village" in the Willamette National Forest was
another long-term occupation undertaken by Cascadian tree-sitters. The village
consisted of two treehouses (160 feet high and high) and one suspension
structure hung between trees. The Winberry village was occupied for 5 years.
One tree house was two story, situated in a huge Western Red-Cedar tree. It
featured a bottom story built from branches in the manner of a bird's nest as
well as a running water system. The Nanning Creek treesit ("Bonanza") is
centered around Spooner, a Redwood with a near circumference, one of the oldest
unprotected trees remaining in the area. This is also a village setup. Nanning
Creek is located in the hills overlooking the town of Scotia, America's last
company-owned town and the site of Pacific Lumber's headquarters. The area was
long protected as a Marbled Murrelet nesting habitat, but recent changes in
environmental law keep loggers out only for the nesting season. "Fern Gully" is
located south of Arcata, California, and north of the Nanning Creek sit. It is
one of the few remaining tracts of old-growth in the Freshwater area. Fern
Gully was started as a "Pirate" sit, unconnected at first from any
organizations such as Earth First!. By 2005, it had 22 trees tied together for
transarboreal travel. The village was equipped with a raincatch system that
transported water down to a running tap at the platform, as well as a solar
panel at in a tree named Watsi. Around that time it was raided by Pacific
Lumber contracted climbers. They did not extract a single person, instead
cutting out unoccupied traverses, platforms and dreamcatchers. This was a major
blow to the village, but the sit continues, and the area remains uncut. "Upper
Village" was a set of 3 redwoods, Jerry, Everstine/Diversity (a double trunk
tree) and Anastasia. Jerry was one of Humboldt County's most famous redwoods. A
woman named Jeny Card (aka "Remedy") stayed without touching ground for 361
days, and later a young man named Willow did the same for over 18 months. Amy
Gershman (aka "Wren") stayed in Everstine for almost ten months, and was later
extracted, arrested, and jailed. After she was released, she went to court, and
her case ended in a hung jury. Upper Village appeared on Da Ali G Show, and
Willow was interviewed from the platform of Jerry by Tom Greene, who was doing
a segment for The Tonight Show with Jay Leno. No other tree has the extraction
history of Jerry. Activists were forcibly removed from the tree on three
separate occasions between March 17, 2003 and June 17, 2003. Each time, the
tree-sit platforms were destroyed by climbers, but immediately replaced by
activists. The Timber Harvest Plan for Upper Village expired in 2005, and the
trespassers removed their platforms and traverses. These trees are located
directly alongside Greenwood Heights road in Freshwater, California. The
"Ludlow" tree village consisted of three basic sits, one large traditional
Western Australian sit and two new sits that were two levels and three levels
consecutively; each allowed the sitter a separate area for sleeping and
relaxing and one for storage, cooking and other activities; one featured a
"sun-deck" for outdoor living. The Ludlow Tuart Forest was targeted, by the
Cable Sands mineral sands mining company, for Titanium Dioxide, for products
such as white paint and toothpaste to fortify the coating of depleted Uranium
weapons. One person remained in one of the sits for 29 days, without leaving
the tree once. The sits were removed but the concept has been used several
times since. Current EF! Tree-village in California (Spring 2011): A tree
village is ongoing in the Ryan Creek watershed next to Eureka, California. Over
45 trees are now tied together, the tree-sits scattered amongst them. This is
to interfere with clear-cutting and development plans by the Green Diamond
Resource Company. The Earth First! Humboldt collective is organizing a campaign
to disrupt logging of this Redwood forest. The company owns around of Redwoods
in Humboldt and Del Norte counties making them the largest single landowner of
Redwood forest. In December 2010, Green Diamond announced they now have plans
with non-profit groups to try to turn approx. of the area, including the tree-
village zone, into a community forest. The details on this plan are still
mostly unclear as of May, 2011. EF! Humboldt website Tree houses. In the United
Kingdom permanent tree houses are common. One treehouse, "BattleStar Galactica"
at the Manchester International Airport, held 12 people. Permanent tree-houses
can be occupied for a year or more. They often have "lock-on" points for
protesters to chain themselves to during evictions. Tree houses have also been
used at Newbury bypass, Crystal Palace and Epsom.
