Trent Lott Chester Trent Lott, Sr. (born October 9, 1941), is a former United
States Senator from Mississippi, who served in numerous leadership positions in
both the United States House of Representatives and the Senate. He entered
Congress as one of the first of a wave of Republicans winning seats in Southern
states that had been solidly Democratic. He became Senate Majority Leader, then
fell from power after praising Strom Thurmond's 1948 segregationist Dixiecrat
presidential bid. Lott entered Congress in 1968 as an administrative assistant
to Representative William M. Colmer of Mississippi, who was also the chairman
of the House Rules Committee. Upon Colmer's retirement, Lott won Colmer's
former seat in the House of Representatives. In 1988, Lott ran successfully for
the U.S. Senate to replace another retiree, John Stennis. After Republicans
took the majority in the Senate, Lott became Senate Majority Whip in 1995 and
then Senate Majority Leader in 1996, upon the resignation of presidential
nominee Bob Dole of Kansas. On December 20, 2002, after significant controversy
following comments regarding Strom Thurmond's presidential candidacy, Lott
resigned as Senate Minority Leader. In December 2007, he resigned from the
Senate and became a Washington-based lobbyist. Republican Roger Wicker won the
2008 special election to replace him. Lott serves as a Senior Fellow at the
Bipartisan Policy Center (BPC), where he focuses on issues related to energy,
national security, transportation and congressional reforms. Lott is also a co-
chair of BPC's Energy Project. Early life. Lott was born in Grenada in northern
Mississippi. His father, Chester Paul Lott, was a shipyard worker; his mother,
the former Iona Watson, was a schoolteacher. He attended college at the
University of Mississippi in Oxford, where he obtained an undergraduate degree
in public administration in 1963 and a law degree in 1967. He served as a field
representative for Ole Miss and was president of his fraternity, Sigma Nu. Lott
was also an Ole Miss cheerleader, on the same team with future U.S. Senator
Thad Cochran. He married Patricia Thompson on December 27, 1964. The couple has
two children: Chester Trent "Chet" Lott, Jr., and Tyler Lott. Political career.
Lott's success as a legislator was already evident in his undergraduate years
at Ole Miss. Lott led the effort at the 1962 national convention of the Sigma
Nu fraternity to defeat the Civil Rights era amendment proposed by the Stanford
and Brown University chapters to end mandatory racial exclusion by the
fraternity. Lott's side prevailed 215 to 76, and Stanford's chapter
subsequently seceded from the fraternity. House of Representatives. He served
as administrative assistant to House Rules Committee chairman William M.
Colmer, also of Pascagoula, from 1968 to 1972. In 1972, Colmer, one of the most
conservative Democrats in the House, announced his retirement after 40 years in
Congress. He endorsed Lott as his successor in Mississippi's 5th District,
located in the state's southwestern tip, even though Lott ran as a Republican.
Lott won handily, in large part due to Richard Nixon's landslide victory in
that year's presidential election. Nixon won the 5th district with an
astonishing 87 percent of the vote; it was his strongest congressional district
in the entire nation. Lott and his future Senate colleague, Thad Cochran (also
elected to Congress that year), were only the second and third Republicans
elected to Congress from Mississippi since Reconstruction. Lott's strong
showing in the polls landed him on the powerful House Judiciary Committee as a
freshman, where he voted against all three articles of impeachment drawn up
against Nixon during the committee's debate. After Nixon released the infamous
"smoking gun" transcripts (which proved Nixon's involvement in the Watergate
cover-up), however, Lott announced that he would vote to impeach Nixon when the
articles came up for debate before the full House (as did the other Republicans
who voted against impeachment in committee). Lott became very popular in his
district, even though almost none of its living residents had been represented
by a Republican before. As evidence, in November 1974, Lott won a second term
in a blowout. Cochran was also reelected in a rout; he and Lott were the first
Republicans to win a second term in Congress from the state since
Reconstruction. They were among the few bright spots in a year that saw many
Republicans turned out of office due to anger over Watergate. Lott was re-
elected six more times without much difficulty, and even ran unopposed in 1978.
In 1980, he served as Ronald Reagan's Mississippi state chairman. He served as
House Minority Whip (the second-ranking Republican in the House) from 1981 to
1989; he was the first Southern Republican to hold such a high leadership
position. United States Senate. Lott ran for the Senate in 1988, after 42-year
incumbent John Stennis announced he would not run for another term. He defeated
Democratic 4th District Congressman Wayne Dowdy by almost eight points. He
never faced another contest nearly that close. He was re-elected in 1994, 2000,
and 2006 with no substantive Democratic opposition. He gave some thought to
retirement for much of 2005, however, after Hurricane Katrina, he announced on
January 17, 2006 that he would run for a fourth term. He became Senate Majority
Whip when the Republicans took control of the Senate in 1995, succeeding as
Majority Leader in 1996 when Bob Dole resigned from the Senate to focus on his
presidential campaign. As majority leader, Lott had a major role in the Senate
trial following the impeachment of President Bill Clinton. After the House
narrowly voted to impeach Clinton, Lott proceeded with the Senate trial in
early 1999, despite criticisms that Republicans were far short of the two-
thirds majority required under the Constitution to convict Clinton and remove
him from office. He later agreed to a decision to suspend the proceedings after
the Senate voted not to convict Clinton. Lott generally pursued a conservative
position in politics and was a noted social conservative. For instance, in
1998, Lott caused some controversy in Congress when as a guest on the Armstrong
Williams television show, he equated homosexuality to alcoholism, kleptomania
and sex addiction. When Williams, a conservative talk show host, asked Lott
whether homosexuality is a sin, Lott simply replied, "Yes, it is." Lott's
stance against homosexuality was disconcerting to many Americans, and various
media outlets questioned his views. After the 2000 elections produced a 50-50
partisan split in the Senate, Vice President Al Gore's tie-breaking vote gave
the Democrats the majority from January 3 to January 20, 2001, when George W.
Bush took office and Vice President Dick Cheney's tie-breaking vote gave the
Republicans the majority once again. Later in 2001, he became Senate Minority
Leader again after Vermont senator Jim Jeffords became an independent and
caucused with the Democrats, allowing them to regain the majority. He was due
to become majority leader again in early 2003 after Republican gains in the
November 2002 elections. Resignation from Senate leadership. Trent Lott spoke
on December 5, 2002 at the 100th birthday party of Sen. Strom Thurmond of South
Carolina, a long time conservative leader. Thurmond had run for President of
the United States in 1948 on the Dixiecrat (or States' Rights) ticket. Lott
said: "When Strom Thurmond ran for president, we voted for him. We’re proud
of it. And if the rest of the country had followed our lead, we wouldn't have
had all these problems over the years, either." Thurmond had based his
presidential campaign largely on an explicit States' Rights platform that
challenged the Civil Rights Movement and later, the Civil Rights Act as
illegally overturning the Separation of powers under the United States
Constitution and called for the preservation of racial segregation. "The
Washington Post" reported that Lott had made similar comments about Thurmond's
candidacy in a 1980 rally. Lott gave an interview with Black Entertainment
Television explaining himself and repudiating Thurmond's former views. In the
wake of controversy, Lott resigned as Senate Republican Leader on December 20,
2002, effective at the start of the next session, January 3, 2003. Bill Frist
of Tennessee was later elected to the leadership position. In the book "Free
Culture", Lawrence Lessig argues that Lott's resignation would not have
occurred had it not been for the effect of Internet blogs. He says that though
the story "disappearfrom the mainstream press within forty-eight hours",
"bloggers kept researching the story" until, "[finally, the story broke back
into the mainstream press." After losing the Majority Leader post, Lott was
less visible on the national scene, although he did break with some standard
conservative positions. He battled with Bush over military base closures in his
home state. He showed support for passenger rail initiatives, notably his 2006
bipartisan introduction, with Sen. Frank Lautenberg of New Jersey, of
legislation to provide 80 percent federal matching grants to intercity rail and
guarantee adequate funding for Amtrak. On July 18, 2006, Lott voted with 19
Republican senators for the Stem Cell Research Enhancement Act to lift
restrictions on federal funding for the research. On November 15, 2006 Lott
regained a leadership position in the Senate, when he was named Minority Whip
after defeating Lamar Alexander of Tennessee 24-23. Senator John E. Sununu (R)
of New Hampshire said, after Lott's election as Senate Minority Whip, "He
understands the rules. He's a strong negotiator." Former House Speaker Newt
Gingrich (R) said he's "the smartest legislative politician I've ever met."
2006 re-election campaign. Lott faced no Republican opposition in the race.
State representative Erik R. Fleming placed first of four candidates in the
June Democratic primary, but did not receive the 50 percent of the vote
required to earn the party's nomination. Fleming and second-place finisher Bill
Bowlin faced off in a runoff on June 27, and Fleming won with 65% of the vote.
Fleming, however, was not regarded as a serious opponent, and Lott handily
defeated him with 64% of the vote. Resignation. On November 26, 2007, Lott
announced that he would resign his Senate seat by the end of 2007. According to
CNN, his resignation was at least partly due to the Honest Leadership and Open
Government Act, which forbids lawmakers from lobbying for two years after
leaving office. Those who leave by the end of 2007 are covered by the previous
law, which demands a wait of only one year. In an interview regarding his
resignation, Lott said that the new law "didn't have a big role" on his
decision to resign. Lott's resignation became effective at 11:30 p.m. on
December 18, 2007. On January 7, 2008 it was announced that Lott and former
Senator John Breaux of Louisiana, a Democrat, opened their lobbying firm about
a block from the White House. Current work. Lott now works at the Breaux Lott
Leadership Group, a "strategic advice, consulting, and lobbying" firm. He also
serves on the board of directors of EADS North America. On October 10, 2008,
Lott was named Honorary Patron of the University Philosophical Society, Trinity
College, Dublin. Lott is a 3rd Degree Freemason and holds the Grand Cross in
The Southern Masonic Jurisdiction. Richard Scruggs controversy. On November 29,
2007, "The New York Times" noted that Lott's brother-in-law, Richard Scruggs,
was indicted on charges of offering a $40,000 bribe to a Mississippi state
judge in a fee dispute. Scruggs represented Lott and then Representative Gene
Taylor in settlements with State Farm Insurance company after the insurer
refused to pay claims for the loss of their Mississippi homes in Hurricane
Katrina. Lott and Taylor had pushed through federal legislation to investigate
claims handling of State Farm and other insurers after Hurricane Katrina, a
potential conflict of interest. On July 30, 2008, the Associated Press reported
that during a deposition related to the Hurricane Katrina claims, Zach Scruggs,
son of Richard Scruggs, was asked by State Farm Fire & Casualty Cos. attorney
Jim Robie, "Has it been your custom and habit in prosecuting litigation to have
Senator Lott contact and encourage witnesses to give false information?" Zach
Scruggs responded, "I invoke my Fifth Amendment rights in response to that
question." On February 14, 2009, "The New York Times" noted in relation to an
indictment of Judge Bobby DeLaughter for taking bribes from Scruggs that
federal prosecutors have said that Lott was induced by Scruggs to offer
DeLaughter a federal judgeship in order to gain the judge's favor. The Richard
Scruggs controversy was the subject of the 2009 book "Kings of Tort" in 2009 by
Alan Lange, and the 2010 book "The Fall of the House of Zeus: The Rise and Ruin
of America's Most Powerful Trial Lawyer". Author. Lott's memoir, entitled ',
was published in 2005. In the book, Lott spoke out on the remark he made at the
Strom Thurmond birthday party, former Senate Majority Leader Bill Frist, and
about his feelings of betrayal toward the Tennessee senator, claiming "If Frist
had not announced exactly when he did, as the fire was about to burn out, I
would still be majority leader of the Senate today." He also described former
Democratic Leader Tom Daschle of South Dakota as trustworthy. He also reveals
that President George W. Bush, then–Secretary of State Colin Powell, and
other GOP leaders played a major role in ending his career as Senate Republican
Leader.
