Trial In law, a trial is a coming together of parties to a dispute, to present
information (in the form of evidence) in a tribunal, a formal setting with the
authority to adjudicate claims or disputes. One form of tribunal is a court.
The tribunal, which may occur before a judge, jury, or other designated trier
of fact, aims to achieve a resolution to their dispute. Types of trial divided
by the finder of fact. Bench trials are often resolved faster. Furthermore, a
favorable ruling for one party in a bench trial will frequently lead the other
party to offer a settlement. Hearings before administrative bodies may have
many of the features of a trial before a court, but are typically not referred
to as trials. An appellate proceeding is also generally not deemed a trial,
because such proceedings are usually restricted to review of the evidence
presented before the trial court, and do not permit the introduction of new
evidence. Types of trial divided by the type of dispute. Trials can also be
divided by the type of dispute at issue. A criminal trial is designed to
resolve accusations brought (usually by a government) against a person accused
of a crime. In common law systems, most criminal defendants are entitled to a
trial held before a jury. Because the state is attempting to use its power to
deprive the accused of life, liberty, or property, the rights of the accused
afforded to criminal defendants are typically broad. The rules of criminal
procedure provide rules for criminal trials. A civil trial is generally held to
settle lawsuits or civil claims - non-criminal disputes. In some countries, the
government can both sue and be sued in a civil capacity. The rules of civil
procedure provide rules for civil trials. Administrative hearing and trial.
Although administrative hearings are not ordinarily considered trials, they
retain many elements found in more "formal" trial settings. When the dispute
goes to judicial setting, it is called an administrative trial, to review the
administrative hearing, depending on the jurisdiction. The types of disputes
handled in these hearings is governed by administrative law and auxiliarily by
the civil trial law. Labor trial. Labor law (also known as employment law) is
the body of laws, administrative rulings, and precedents which address the
legal rights of, and restrictions on, working people and their organizations.
As such, it mediates many aspects of the relationship between trade unions,
employers and employees. In Canada, employment laws related to unionized
workplaces are differentiated from those relating to particular individuals. In
most countries however, no such distinction is made. However, there are two
broad categories of labour law. First, collective labour law relates to the
tripartite relationship between employee, employer and union. Second,
individual labour law concerns employees' rights at work and through the
contract for work. The labour movement has been instrumental in the enacting of
laws protecting labour rights in the 19th and 20th centuries. Labour rights
have been integral to the social and economic development since the industrial
revolution. Trial. The form of the trial. Also see Hung jury. Mistrials. A
judge may cancel a trial prior to the return of a verdict; legal parlance
designates this as a mistrial. A judge may declare a mistrial due to: A
declaration of a mistrial generally means that a court must hold a retrial on
the same subject. Other kinds of trials. Some other kinds of processes for
resolving conflicts are also expressed as trials. For example, the United
States Constitution requires that, following the impeachment of the President,
a judge, or another federal officer by the House of Representatives, the
subject of the impeachment may only be removed from office by a trial in the
Senate. In earlier times disputes were often settled through a trial by ordeal,
where parties would have to endure physical suffering in order to prove their
righteousness; or through a trial by combat, in which the winner of a physical
fight was deemed righteous in their cause.
