Triple bottom line The triple bottom line (abbreviated as TBL or 3BL, and also
known as people, planet, profit or the three pillars) captures an expanded
spectrum of values and criteria for measuring organizational (and societal)
success: economic, ecological, and social. With the ratification of the United
Nations and ICLEI TBL standard for urban and community accounting in early
2007, this became the dominant approach to public sector full cost accounting.
Similar UN standards apply to natural capital and human capital measurement to
assist in measurements required by TBL, e.g. the EcoBudget standard for
reporting ecological footprint. In the private sector, a commitment to
corporate social responsibility (CSR) implies a commitment to some form of TBL
reporting. This is distinct from the more limited changes required to deal only
with ecological issues. Definition. Triple bottom line (TBL) accounting expands
the traditional reporting framework to take into account social and
environmental performance in addition to financial performance. In 1981 Freer
Spreckley first articulated the triple bottom line in a publication called
'Social Audit - A Management Tool for Co-operative Working'. In this work, he
argued that enterprises should measure and report on social, environmental and
financial performance. The phrase was coined by John Elkington in his 1997 book
"Cannibals with Forks: the Triple Bottom Line of 21st Century Business."
Sustainability, itself, was first defined by the Brundtland Commission of the
United Nations in 1987. 1988 also marked the foundation of the "Triple Bottom
Line Investing" group by Robert J. Rubinstein, a group advocating and
publicizing these principles. The concept of TBL demands that a company's
responsibility lies with stakeholders rather than shareholders. In this case,
"stakeholders" refers to anyone who is influenced, either directly or
indirectly, by the actions of the firm. According to the stakeholder theory,
the business entity should be used as a vehicle for coordinating stakeholder
interests, instead of maximizing shareholder (owner) profit. Bottom lines. The
triple bottom line is made up of "social, economic and environmental" factors.
"People, planet and profit" succinctly describes the triple bottom lines and
the goal of sustainability. The phrase, "people, planet, profit", was coined by
John Elkington in 1995 while at SustainAbility, and was later adopted as the
title of the Anglo-Dutch oil company Shell's first sustainability report in
1997. As a result, one country in which the 3P concept took deep root was The
Netherlands. "People" pertains to fair and beneficial business practices toward
labour and the community and region in which a corporation conducts its
business. A TBL company conceives a reciprocal social structure in which the
well-being of corporate, labour and other stakeholder interests are
interdependent. A triple bottom line enterprise seeks to benefit many
constituencies, not exploit or endanger any group of them. The "upstreaming" of
a portion of profit from the marketing of finished goods back to the original
producer of raw materials, for example, a farmer in fair trade agricultural
practice, is a common feature. In concrete terms, a TBL business would not use
child labour and monitor all contracted companies for child labour
exploitation, would pay fair salaries to its workers, would maintain a safe
work environment and tolerable working hours, and would not otherwise exploit a
community or its labour force. A TBL business also typically seeks to "give
back" by contributing to the strength and growth of its community with such
things as health care and education. Quantifying this bottom line is relatively
new, problematic and often subjective. The Global Reporting Initiative (GRI)
has developed guidelines to enable corporations and NGOs alike to comparably
report on the social impact of a business. "Planet" (natural capital) refers to
sustainable environmental practices. A TBL company endeavors to benefit the
natural order as much as possible or at the least do no harm and minimise
environmental impact. A TBL endeavour reduces its ecological footprint by,
among other things, carefully managing its consumption of energy and non-
renewables and reducing manufacturing waste as well as rendering waste less
toxic before disposing of it in a safe and legal manner. "Cradle to grave" is
uppermost in the thoughts of TBL manufacturing businesses, which typically
conduct a life cycle assessment of products to determine what the true
environmental cost is from the growth and harvesting of raw materials to
manufacture to distribution to eventual disposal by the end user. A triple
bottom line company does not produce harmful or destructive products such as
weapons, toxic chemicals or batteries containing dangerous heavy metals, for
example. Currently, the cost of disposing of non-degradable or toxic products
is borne financially by governments and environmentally by the residents near
the disposal site and elsewhere. In TBL thinking, an enterprise which produces
and markets a product which will create a waste problem should not be given a
free ride by society. It would be more equitable for the business which
manufactures and sells a problematic product to bear part of the cost of its
ultimate disposal. Ecologically destructive practices, such as overfishing or
other endangering depletions of resources are avoided by TBL companies. Often
environmental sustainability is the more profitable course for a business in
the long run. Arguments that it costs more to be environmentally sound are
often specious when the course of the business is analyzed over a period of
time. Generally, sustainability reporting metrics are better quantified and
standardized for environmental issues than for social ones. A number of
respected reporting institutes and registries exist including the Global
Reporting Initiative, CERES, Institute 4 Sustainability and others. The eco
bottom line is akin to the concept of Eco-capitalism. "Profit" is the economic
value created by the organization after deducting the cost of all inputs,
including the cost of the capital tied up. It therefore differs from
traditional accounting definitions of profit. In the original concept, within a
sustainability framework, the "profit" aspect needs to be seen as the real
economic benefit enjoyed by the host society. It is the real economic impact
the organization has on its economic environment. This is often confused to be
limited to the internal profit made by a company or organization (which
nevertheless remains an essential starting point for the computation).
Therefore, an original TBL approach cannot be interpreted as simply traditional
corporate accounting profit "plus" social and environmental impacts unless the
"profits" of other entities are included as a social benefit. Supporting
arguments. Fiscal policy of governments usually claims to be concerned with
identifying social and natural deficits on a less formal basis. However, such
choices may be guided more by ideology than by economics. The primary benefit
of embedding one approach to measurement of these deficits would be first to
direct monetary policy to reduce them, and eventually achieve a global monetary
reform by which they could be systematically and globally reduced in some
uniform way. The argument is that the Earth's carrying capacity is itself at
risk, and that in order to avoid catastrophic breakdown of climate or
ecosystem, there is a need for a comprehensive reform in global financial
institutions similar in scale to that undertaken at Bretton Woods in 1944.
Marilyn Waring has been a major proponent of this reform. With the emergence of
an externally consistent green economics and agreement on definitions of
potentially contentious terms such as full-cost accounting, natural capital and
social capital, the prospect of formal metrics for ecological and social loss
or risk has grown less remote through the 1990s. In the United Kingdom in
particular, the London Health Observatory has undertaken a formal programme to
address social deficits via a fuller understanding of what "social capital" is,
how it functions in a real community (that being the City of London), and how
losses of it tend to require both financial capital and significant political
and social attention from volunteers and professionals to help resolve. The
data they rely on is extensive, building on decades of statistics of the
Greater London Council since World War II. Similar studies have been undertaken
in North America. Studies of the value of Earth have tried to determine what
might constitute an ecological or natural life deficit. The Kyoto Protocol
relies on some measures of this sort, and actually relies on some value of life
calculations that, among other things, are explicit about the ratio of the
price of a human life between developed and developing nations (about 15 to 1).
While the motive of this number was to simply assign responsibility for a
cleanup, such stark honesty opens not just an economic but political door to
some kind of negotiation — presumably to reduce that ratio in time to
something seen as more equitable. As it is, people in developed nations can be
said to benefit 15 times more from ecological devastation than in developing
nations, in pure financial terms. According to the IPCC, they are thus obliged
to pay 15 times more per life to avoid a loss of each such life to climate
change — the Kyoto Protocol seeks to implement exactly this formula, and is
therefore sometimes cited as a first step towards getting nations to accept
formal liability for damage inflicted on ecosystems shared globally. Advocacy
for triple bottom line reforms is common in Green Parties. Some of the measures
undertaken in the European Union towards the Euro currency integration
standardize the reporting of ecological and social losses in such a way as to
seem to endorse in principle the notion of unified accounts, or unit of
account, for these deficits. Criticism. While many people agree with the
importance of good social conditions and preservation of the environment, there
are also many who disagree with the triple bottom line as the way to enhance
these conditions. The main arguments against it are summarised below.
Legislation. Legislation permitting corporations to adopt a triple bottom line
is under consideration in some jurisdictions, including Minnesota and Oregon.
Some businesses have voluntarily adopted a triple bottom line as part of their
articles of incorporation or bylaws, and some have advocated for state laws
creating a "Sustainable Corporation" that would grant triple bottom line
businesses benefits such as tax breaks. The triple bottom line was adopted as a
part of the State Sustainability Strategy, and accepted by the Government of
Western Australia but its status was increasingly marginalised by subsequent
premiers Alan Carpenter and Colin Barnett and is in doubt.
