Tripartite classification of authority Max Weber distinguished three ideal
types of legitimate political leadership, domination and authority: These three
types are ideal pure types and rarely appear in their pure form. According to
Weber, authority is power accepted as legitimate by those subjected to it.
These three forms of authority are said to appear in an "hierarchical
development order". States progress from "charismatic authority", to
"traditional authority", and finally reach the "state of rational-legal
authority" which is characteristic of a modern liberal democracy. Charismatic
domination. Charismatic authority grows out of the personal charm or the
strength of an individual personality. It was described by Weber in a lecture
as "the authority of the extraordinary and personal gift of grace (charisma)";
he distinguished it from the other forms of authority by stating "Men do not
obey him charismatic ruler by virtue of tradition or statute, but because they
believe in him." Thus the actual power or capabilities of the leader are
irrelevant, as long as the followers believe that such power exists. Thus,
according to Weber, it is particularly difficult for charismatic leaders to
maintain their authority because the followers must continue to legitimize the
authority of the leader. Charismatic domination is insofar different from
legal-rational and tradition power as it does not develop from established
tradition but rather from the belief the followers have in the leader.
According to Weber, once the leader loses his charisma or dies, systems based
on charismatic authority tend to transform into traditional or legal-rational
systems. Traditional domination. In traditional authority, the legitimacy of
the authority comes from tradition or custom; Weber described it as "the
authority of the eternal yesterday" and identified it as the source of
authority for monarchies. In this type of domination, the traditional rights of
a powerful individual or group are accepted by the subordinate, or at least not
challenged. The dominant individual could be a clan leader, eldest, the head of
a family, a patriarchal figure or dominant elite. Historically this has been
the most common type of government. According to Weber inequalities are created
and preserved by traditional authority. Should this authority not be
challenged, the dominant leader or group will stay in power. For Weber,
traditional power blocked the development of rational-legal authority. Legal
Rational domination. Legal authority, also known as legal-rational authority,
is where an individual or institution exerts power by virtue of the legal
office that they hold. It is the authority that demands obedience to the office
rather than the office holder; once they leave office, their rational-legal
authority is lost. Weber identified ""rationally-created rules"" as the central
feature of this form of authority. Modern democracies contain many examples of
legal-rational regimes. There are different ways in which legal authority can
develop. Many societies have developed a system of laws and regulations and
there exist many different principles of legality. With the development of a
legal-rational system, the political system is likely to be rationalized
similarly. Constitutions, written documents, established offices and regular
elections are often associated with modern legal-rational political systems.
These in the past have tended to develop in opposition to earlier traditional
systems such as monarchies, where the set of rules are not well developed. As
these systems develop in a rational manner, authority takes on a legal-rational
form. Those who govern have the legitimate legal right to do so and those
subordinated accept the legality of the rulers. Albeit rational-legal authority
may be challenged by those subordinated, it is unlikely to result in a quick
change in the nature of the system. Such power-struggles, according to Weber,
may be based on nationalism, ethnicity and are mostly political struggles. The
classification of authority in the context of history. Weber also notes that
legal domination is the most advanced, and that societies evolve from having
mostly traditional and charismatic authorities to mostly rational and legal
ones, because the instability of charismatic authority inevitably forces it to
"routinize" into a more structured form of authority. Likewise he notes that in
a pure type of traditional rule, sufficient resistance to a master can lead to
a "traditional revolution". Thus he alludes to an inevitable move towards a
rational-legal structure of authority, utilizing a bureaucratic structure. This
ties to his broader concept of rationalization by suggesting the inevitability
of a move in this direction. Thus this theory can be sometimes viewed as part
of the social evolutionism theory. In traditional authority, the legitimacy of
the authority comes from tradition, in charismatic authority from the
personality and leadership qualities of the individual (charisma), and in legal
(or rational-legal) authority from powers that are bureaucratically and legally
attached to certain positions. A classic example of these three types may be
found in religion: priests (traditional), Jesus (charismatic), and the Roman
Catholic Church (legal-rational). Weber also conceived of these three types
within his three primary modes of conflict: traditional authority within status
groups, charismatic authority within class, and legal-rational authority within
party organizations. In his view every historical relation between rulers and
ruled contained elements that can be analyzed on the basis of the above
distinction.
