Triumphalism Triumphalism is the attitude or belief that a particular doctrine,
religion, culture, or social system is superior to and should triumph over all
others. Triumphalism is not an articulated doctrine but rather a term that is
used to characterize certain attitudes or belief systems by parties such as
political commentators and historians. Definition. The term triumphalism is
what anthropologists call an "observer's category"; it is generally taken as
having a pejorative sense (see the "Oxford English Dictionary") and few members
of groups would identify themselves as being triumphalist. The term is
sometimes used to refer to relatively inconsequential behavior, such as
excessively demonstrative glee at the defeat or failure of a sports rival.
People experience triumphalism in this recreational form as collective pride
(e.g., school spirit) or sports fanaticism ("“We’re Number One!”").
Triumphalism also takes more consequential forms, including extreme forms of
patriotism, nationalism, ideological, or religious extremism. A triumphalist
may derive a sense of pride, security, or virtue from their sense of
superiority and expectation of ultimate triumph. However, those who believe in
their own group’s superiority or inevitable ascendancy do not typically claim
the label ‘triumphalist’. Instead, the term usually has a negative
connotation and is used by those who do not accept the superiority of the
belief or group in question, or by those who are warning against the effects of
over-confidence and hubris within their own group. Analysis. Triumphalism may
both benefit and prove detrimental to the survival of a doctrine, culture, or
social system. Dangers include:A tendency to over-reach against the group’s
competitors, based on an inflated sense of the likelihood of triumph in
conflict.
At the same time, triumphalism also provides impetus to proselytization,
conquest and the general expansion of a group or doctrine. Many successful
historical movements have worked from a triumphalist base. Examples include the
Islamic conquests of the 7th century, European colonialism, and the concept of
manifest destiny which helped the United States to dominance in North America,
in the process transforming itself into what some call the American empire.
Movements need not be triumphalist to be dynamic and successful. The Western
drive for the emancipation of women and the civil rights movement, for
instance, succeeded on the basis of egalitarianism rather than triumphalism.
Quotations. 2008, Capitalism 2005, Muslim 2004, Jewish 2004, American 2001,
scientific 2001, Christian 2012, Politics 1994, Soviet
