Tully Satre Tully Meehan Satre (born 17 May 1989 in Dover, Delaware) is an
American artist, writer and former gay rights youth activist based in Chicago
and London. He received a Bachelor of Fine Arts from the School of the Art
Institute of Chicago in 2011 and is a current candidate for a postgraduate
diploma from the Royal Academy of Arts in London, though he was refused a
student visa. Satre was known for his involvement at a young age in gay rights
activism in Virginia, which he put behind after moving to Chicago in 2007 for
school, though he still wrote for "The Advocate" at the time. During the Summer
of 2006, Satre attended the NYU Tisch School of the Arts CAP 21 Studio for
Musical Theatre. In 2007, he attended one semester at the The Theatre
Conservatory of Chicago College of Performing Arts at Roosevelt University,
majoring in Musical Theater. Activism. Fauquier and Culpeper Counties,
Virginia. In June 2005, Tully Satre founded Equality Fauquier-Culpeper in the
rural suburbs of Greater Washington. From its founding, Equality Fauquier-
Culpeper gained wide media coverage in numerous national and local publications
including The Washington Post, The Washington Blade, and The Advocate. Satre
served as the Executive Director of Equality Fauquier-Culpeper, which was
headquartered in Warrenton, Virginia, from its inception until June 2007 at
which point he stepped down from his position with Equality Fauquier-Culpeper
and moved to Chicago to attend school. "At 16 years of age, Tully Satre, is
spearheading one of the most controversial equality groups in Culpeper and
Fauquier counties. "We're living in two very conservative counties that have a
great amount of discrimination with no policies or laws protecting gay
citizens," Satre said. "I am an activist, I'll always be an activist and age is
just a number and can never define a person's capabilities." Satre, founder and
executive director of Equality Fauquier/Culpeper (EFC), said the reason he
wanted to create an organization that reached out to the gay, lesbian,
bisexual, transgendered (GLBT) and questioning community is so that equal
rights might one day be established." "Pamela Kulick / Staff Writer / Culpeper
News / 18 August 2005" Tully Satre began a blog in 2006 on LiveJournal
documenting his youth activism. Shortly after Satre's blog was launched,
AMERICAblog's John Aravosis discovered Satre's online journal after the youth
activist wrote about this experience confronting U.S. Senator George Allen at a
town hall meeting in Culpeper, an encounter that drew the spotlight on Satre
and his work. The debacle about Allen's lack of support for a federal hate
crimes bill protecting people based on their sexual orientation, drew
nationwide attention on the young activist. Satre's story flew across the
social media stratosphere (from Andrew Sullivan's blog, Pam's House Blend to
"The Advocate"s online edition of their magazine) and was widely covered in
local and national print. The New York Times described Satre as "a pony-tailed
16-year-old" who confronted Allen at the town hall meeting geared towards
Allen's possible 2008 presidential bid. Local press such as the Fredericksburg
Free Lance-Star, and the Culpeper Star-Exponent also took to Satre's debacle
with Senator Allen. Two months after Allen's run-in with Satre, the veteran
Senator made a notorious comment while campaigning, contributing to Allen's
notorious image with the press. Allen lost the election and was succeeded by
Senator Jim Webb. With stronger local support following the media bliss for
Equality Fauquier-Culpeper, Satre began sharing the story of his experiences as
a gay youth from rural Virginia outside his hometown. He appeared on television
and radio shows such as Gay USA with Andy Humm, OutQ on Sirius Satellite Radio
with Michelangelo Signorile, and was the first student to appear on Richmond's
Education Radio. Statewide, Virginia. In January 2006, Tully founded
Commonwealth Education Equality Virginia (CEEVA), a statewide organization
advocating for GLBT/Q youth. He served as president from 2006-2007 but is no
longer involved with the organization. In 2007, CEEVA was merged into the
Virginia Safe Schools Project. Satre was nominated to serve on the Board of
Directors for Equality Virginia, to become the first teenager to serve on a
statewide gay rights organization in the United States but could not accept the
position because he was under the age of 18. Other. In 2006 Satre founded The
Voice Project for LGBTQI Equality, Support & Inclusion, an internet outreach
program for GLBT/Q youth which also promotes civic participation among teens
for equality. (TVP formed as a national web and community-based organization
which sponsors the online network project known as Equality Myspace.) "Tully
Satre, 17, says he knows what it's like to be bullied. He knows how it feels to
be called names and ostracized. "I'm gay and I go to a Catholic school. You get
the picture there," said the senior at Notre Dame Academy in Middleburg. But
through his involvement in "Normal," a play about bullying and the teenage
experience, he has come to understand that he's a bully, too. "What's so
intense about this process is that we realize we've all been bullies, that some
of the things we've said or done could have hurt other people. It's been very
awakening," said Satre, one in a cast of 26 students from Loudoun and Fauquier
county schools." "Arianne Aryanpur / Washington Post Staff Writer / The
Washington Post / 25 January 2007" In August 2007 Satre's "The Voice Project"
changed leadership as Satre moved to Chicago. The project no longer appears to
be active. Beginning in May 2010, Satre served for one year on the Associate
Board for the Illinois Maternal & Child Health Coalition. In March 2010,
Northern Virginia Magazine featured Satre in an article about gay marriage in
Virginia. The article mentions that Satre was told by police to leave a
neighborhood (despite a 2002 U.S. Supreme Court ruling) for canvassing against
an anti-marriage amendment. Writing. "The Advocate". Fueled by the popularity
of Satre's story, "The Advocate" began publishing weekly op-eds written by
Satre in May 2006 written by the youth activist. Satre's article on
Bisexuality, ("I'm no faggot, I'm bisexual" Published on Advocate.com was the
subject of much controversy for the young writer. After receiving an
overwhelming response, Satre released a rebuttal to statements made against him
in several online gay commentaries. Shortly thereafter, Satre was also widely
reprimanded on the blogosphere for his position on the death of Jerry Falwell
in his article "No Class" from May 2007. Satre's last article for "The
Advocate" was published October 2007. He has not published with the magazine
since. Journalism. In October 2007, Satre began writing new features for
Chicago's Windy City Times. Though primarily objective reporting, Satre has
published a few op-eds similar to his work with "The Advocate". Exhibitions. In
May 2012, Satre exhibited a series of paintings in a studio in Chicago's Fine
Arts Building after the UK refused to issue him a student visa to attend the
Royal Academy of Arts.
