Screen-Free Week Screen-Free Week (formerly TV-Turnoff) is an annual event
where children, families, schools and communities are encouraged to turn off
screens and "turn on life." Instead of relying on television programming for
entertainment, participants read, daydream, explore, enjoy nature, and spend
time with family and friends. Over 100 million people have taken part in the
turnoff, with millions participating each year. In 2010, Campaign for a
Commercial-Free Childhood (CCFC) became the home of Screen-Free Week at the
request of the Board of the Center for SCREEN-TIME Awareness (CSTA), which ran
the initiative since 1994 (first as TV-Free America). CCFC launched a new
website and developed a new Organizer's Kit, fact sheets, and other materials
for Screen-Free Week 2011 and beyond. The Screen-Free Week Organizer's Kit is
available as a free download. History. In 1994, the week was first championed
by TV-Free America, and promoted by Adbusters magazine and other organizations.
TV-Free America then became Center for SCREEN-TIME Awareness. CSTA was an
organization that encouraged all people to use electronic screen media
responsibly and then have more time for a healthier life and more community
participation. It was a grassroots alliance of many different organizations,
with participation in over 70 nations around the world.Screen Free week happens
in Canada. CCFC changed the name of TV-Turnoff to Screen-Free Week in 2010,
since entertainment media (and advertising) are increasingly delivered through
a variety of screens (computers, hand-held devices, etc.), and not just
traditional television commercials. In 2008 Adbusters changed the name of TV
Turnoff Week to Digital Detox Week to reflect the growing predominance of
computers and other digital devices. Dates. 2012: April 30-May 6 2013: April
29-May 5 Members and supporters. Important members of the network include
Adbusters in Canada and White Dot in the UK (named after the small white dot
that would briefly appear when turning off older TV sets, especially black-and-
white ones). A related organization, , works in many countries with large
Spanish-speaking populations. In France, is part of the event. More than
seventy other organizations, such as the American Heart Association, the
American Medical Association, Big Brothers Big Sisters of America and the YMCA,
support the movement in the US. In 2004, a major partnership was created with
the American Academy of Pediatrics. Anti-TV "guerrillas" use a small device
known as TV-B-Gone to remotely turn off television sets within in an attempt to
reduce "ambient TV" in public spaces.
