Two Treatises of Government The Two Treatises of Government (or ""Two Treatises
of Government: In the Former, The False Principles and Foundation of Sir Robert
Filmer, And His Followers, are Detected and Overthrown. The Latter is an Essay
concerning The True Original, Extent, and End of Civil-Government"") is a work
of political philosophy published anonymously in 1689 by John Locke. The "First
Treatise" attacks patriarchalism in the form of sentence-by-sentence refutation
of Robert Filmer's "Patriarcha" and the "Second Treatise" outlines his ideas
for a more civilised society based on natural rights and contract theory.
Writing about the "Two Treatises of Government", Hans-Hermann Hoppe has
referred to John Locke as "the outstanding champion of freedom". Historical
context. King James II of England (VII of Scotland) was overthrown in 1688 by a
union of Parliamentarians and stadtholder of the Dutch Republic William III of
Orange-Nassau (William of Orange), who as a result ascended the English throne
as William III of England. This invasion and conquest of England is known as
the Glorious Revolution, also called the Revolution of 1688. Locke claims in
the "Preface" to the "Two Treatises" that its purpose is to justify William
III's ascension to the throne, though Peter Laslett suggests that the bulk of
the writing was instead completed between 1679-1680 (and subsequently revised
until Locke was driven into exile in 1683). According to Laslett, Locke was
writing his "Two Treatises" during the Exclusion Crisis, which attempted to
prevent James II from ever taking the throne in the first place. Anthony
Ashley-Cooper, 1st Earl of Shaftesbury, Locke's mentor, patron and friend,
introduced the bill, but it was ultimately unsuccessful. Richard Ashcraft,
following in Laslett's suggestion that the "Two Treatises" were written before
the Revolution, objected that Shaftesbury's party did not advocate revolution
during the Exclusion Crisis. He suggests that they are instead better
associated with the revolutionary conspiracies that swirled around what would
come to be known as the Rye House Plot. Locke, Shaftesbury and many others were
forced into exile; some, such as Sidney, were even executed for treason. Locke
knew his work was dangerous—he never acknowledged his authorship within his
lifetime. Publication history. "Two Treatises" was first published,
anonymously, in December of 1689 (following printing conventions of the time,
its title page was marked 1690). Locke was unhappy with this edition,
complaining to the publisher about its many errors. For the rest of his life,
he was intent on republishing the "Two Treatises" in a form that better
reflected his meaning. Peter Laslett, one of the foremost Locke scholars, has
suggested that Locke held the printers to a higher "standard of perfection"
than the technology of the time would permit. Be that as it may, the first
edition was indeed replete with errors. The second edition was even worse, and
finally printed on cheap paper and sold to the poor. The third edition was much
improved, but Locke was still not satisfied. He made corrections to the third
edition by hand and entrusted the publication of the fourth to his friends, as
he died before it could be brought out. The "Two Treatises" begin with a
Preface announcing what Locke hopes to achieve, but he also mentions that more
than half of his original draft, occupying a space between the "First" and
"Second Treatises", has been irretrievably lost. Peter Laslett maintains that,
while Locke may have added or altered some portions in 1689, he did not make
any revisions to accommodate for the missing section; he argues, for example,
that the end of the "First Treatise" breaks off in mid-sentence. In 1691 "Two
Treatises" was translated into French by David Mazzel, a French Huguenot living
in the Netherlands. This translation left out Locke's "Preface," all of the
"First Treatise", and the first chapter of the "Second Treatise" (which
summarised Locke's conclusions in the "First Treatise"). It was in this form
that Locke's work was reprinted during the 18th century in France and in this
form that Montesquieu, Voltaire and Rousseau were exposed to it. The only
American edition from the 18th century was printed in 1773 in Boston; it, too,
left out all of these sections. There were no other American editions until the
20th century. Main ideas. "Two Treatises" is divided into the "First Treatise"
and the "Second Treatise". The original title of the "Second Treatise" appears
to have been simply "Book II," corresponding to the title of the "First
Treatise", "Book I." Before publication, however, Locke gave it greater
prominence by (hastily) inserting a separate title page: "An Essay Concerning
the True Original, Extent and End of Civil Government." The "First Treatise" is
focused on the refutation of Sir Robert Filmer, in particular his "Patriarcha",
which argued that civil society was founded on a divinely sanctioned
patriarchalism. Locke proceeds through Filmer's arguments, contesting his
proofs from Scripture and ridiculing them as senseless, until concluding that
no government can be justified by an appeal to the divine right of kings. The
"Second Treatise" outlines a theory of civil society. John Locke begins by
describing the state of nature, a picture much more stable than Thomas Hobbes'
state of "war of every man against every man," and argues that all men are
created equal in the state of nature by God. From this, he goes on to explain
the hypothetical rise of property and civilization, in the process explaining
that the only legitimate governments are those that have the consent of the
people. Therefore, any government that rules without the consent of the people
can, in theory, be overthrown. "First Treatise". The "First Treatise" is an
extended attack on Sir Robert Filmer's "Patriarcha". Locke's argument proceeds
along two lines: first, he undercuts the Scriptural support that Filmer had
offered for his thesis, and second he argues that the acceptance of Filmer's
thesis can lead only to absurdity. Locke chose Filmer as his target, he says,
because of his reputation and because he "carried this Argument ["jure divino"]
farthest, and is supposed to have brought it to perfection" (1st Tr., §5).
Filmer's text presented an argument for a divinely ordained, hereditary,
absolute monarchy. According to Filmer, the Biblical Adam in his role as father
possessed unlimited power over his children and this authority passed down
through the generations. Locke attacks this on several grounds. Accepting that
fatherhood grants authority, he argues, it would do so only by the act of
begetting, and so cannot be transmitted to one's children because only God can
create life. Nor is the power of a father over his children absolute, as Filmer
would have it; Locke points to the joint power parents share over their
children outlined in the Bible. In the "Second Treatise" Locke returns to a
discussion of parental power. (Both of these discussions have drawn the
interest of modern feminists such as Carole Pateman.) Filmer also suggested
that Adam's absolute authority came from his ownership over all the world. To
this, Locke rebuts that the world was originally held in common (a theme that
will return in the "Second Treatise"). But, even if it were not, he argues,
God's grant to Adam covered only the land and brute animals, not human beings.
Nor could Adam, or his heir, leverage this grant to enslave mankind, for the
law of nature forbids reducing one's fellows to a state of desperation, if one
possesses a sufficient surplus to maintain oneself securely. And even if this
charity were not commanded by reason, Locke continues, such a strategy for
gaining dominion would prove only that the foundation of government lies in
consent. I think he is the first Politician, who, pretending to settle
Government upon its true Basis, and to establish the Thrones of lawful Princes,
ever told the World, That he was "properly a King, whose Manner of Government
was by Supreme Power, by what Means soever he obtained it"; which in plain
"English" is to say, that Regal and Supreme Power is properly and truly his,
who can by any Means seize upon it; and if this be, to be "properly a King", I
wonder how he came to think of, or where he will find, an "Usurper". (1st Tr.,
§79) Locke ends the "First Treatise" by examining the history told in the
Bible and the history of the world since then; he concludes that there is no
evidence to support Filmer's hypothesis. According to Locke, no king has ever
claimed that his authority rested upon his being the heir of Adam. It is
Filmer, Locke alleges, that is the innovator in politics, not those who assert
the natural equality and freedom of man. "Second Treatise". In the "Second
Treatise" Locke develops a number of notable themes. It begins with a depiction
of the state of nature, wherein individuals are under no obligation to obey one
another but are each themselves judge of what the law of nature requires. It
also covers conquest and slavery, property, representative government, and the
right of revolution. State of nature. "Two Treatises On Government: A
Translation Into Modern English", ISR/Google Books, 2009, page 70. The work of
Thomas Hobbes made theories based upon a state of nature popular in 17th-
century England, even as most of those who employed such arguments were deeply
troubled by his absolutist conclusions. Locke's state of nature can be seen in
light of this tradition. Because there is no divinely ordained monarch over all
the world, as was argued in the "First Treatise", the natural state of mankind
is anarchic. In contrast to Hobbes, who posited the state of nature as a
hypothetical possibility, Locke took great pains to show that such a state did
indeed exist. Indeed, it exists wherever there is no legitimate government.
Whereas Hobbes speaks of the misery of the State of Nature more directly, Locke
waits until Chapter IX to describe the state of nature as one that 'however
free, is full of continual dangers.' While no individual in this state may tell
another what to do or authoritatively pronounce justice in a given case, men
are not free to do whatever they please. "The state of nature has a law of
nature to govern it, which obliges every one: and reason, which is that law,
teaches all mankind, who will but consult it" (2nd Tr., §6). The specifics of
this law are unwritten, however, and so each is likely to misapply it in his
own case. Lacking any commonly recognized, impartial judge, there is no way to
correct these misapplications. Even were such a judge available, the just are
vastly outnumbered by the unjust and indifferent, so his pronouncements would
lack effect. This section, §6, also presumes theism. In other words, rather
than arguing for the presence of men by natural ideas, Locke assumes that all
men are born by God. The law of nature is therefore ill enforced in the state
of nature. IF man in the state of nature be so free, as has been said; if he be
absolute lord of his own person and possessions, equal to the greatest, and
subject to no body, why will he part with his freedom? Why will he give up this
empire, and subject himself to the dominion and control of any other power? To
which it is obvious to answer, that though in the state of nature he hath such
a right, yet the enjoyment of it is very uncertain, and constantly exposed to
the invasion of others: for all being kings as much as he, every man his equal,
and the greater part no strict observers of equity and justice, the enjoyment
of the property he has in this state is very unsafe, very unsecure. This makes
him willing to quit a condition, which, however free, is full of fears and
continual dangers: and it is not without reason, that he seeks out, and is
willing to join in society with others, who are already united, or have a mind
to unite, for the mutual preservation of their lives, liberties and estates,
which I call by the general name, property. (2nd Tr., §123) What should be a
state of peace very quickly begins to look like the state of war that Hobbes
described (though the ill enforcement of the law of nature does not release
individuals from their obligation to it, as it does in Hobbes). It is to avoid
the state of war that often occurs in the state of nature, and to protect their
private property that men enter into civil or political society, i.e., state of
society. It is also the state that men return to upon the dissolution of
government, i.e., under tyranny. Conquest and slavery. Ch. 4 ("Of Slavery") and
Ch. 16 ("Of Conquest") are sources of some confusion: the former provides a
justification for slavery, the latter, the rights of conquerors. Because the
"Fundamental Constitutions of Carolina" provided that a master had perfect
authority over his slaves, some have taken these chapters to be an apology for
the institution of slavery in Colonial America. Most Locke scholars roundly
reject this reading, as it is directly at odds with the text. The extent of
Locke's involvement in drafting the "Fundamental Constitutions" is a matter of
some debate, but even attributing full culpability for its contents and for his
having profited from the Atlantic slave trade, the majority of experts will
concede that Locke may have been a hypocrite in this matter, but are adamant
that no part of the "Two Treatises" can be used to provide theoretical support
for slavery by bare right of conquest. In the rhetoric of 17th-century England,
those who opposed the increasing power of the kings claimed that the country
was headed for a condition of slavery. Locke therefore asks, facetiously, under
what conditions such slavery might be justified. He notes that slavery cannot
come about as a matter of contract (which became the basis of Locke's political
system). To be a slave is to be subject to the absolute, arbitrary power of
another; as men do not have this power even over themselves, they cannot sell
or otherwise grant it to another. One that is deserving of death, i.e., who has
violated the law of nature, may be enslaved. This is, however, "but the state
of war continued" (2nd Tr., §24), and even one justly a slave therefore has no
obligation to obedience. In providing a justification for slavery, he has
rendered all forms of slavery as it actually exists invalid. Moreover, as one
may not submit to slavery, there is a moral injunction to attempt to throw off
and escape it whenever it looms. Most scholars take this to be Locke's point
regarding slavery: submission to absolute monarchy is a violation of the law of
nature, for one does not have the right to enslave oneself. The legitimacy of
an English king depended on (somehow) demonstrating descent from William the
Conqueror: the right of conquest was therefore a topic rife with constitutional
connotations. Locke does not say that all subsequent English monarchs have been
illegitimate, but he does make their rightful authority dependent solely upon
their having acquired the people's approbation. Locke first argues that,
clearly, aggressors in an unjust war can claim no right of conquest: everything
they despoil may be retaken as soon as the dispossessed have the strength to do
so. Their children retain this right, so an ancient usurpation does not become
lawful with time. The rest of the chapter then considers what rights a just
conqueror might have. The argument proceeds negatively: Locke proposes one
power a conqueror could gain, and then demonstrates how in point of fact that
power cannot be claimed. He gains no authority over those that conquered with
him, for they did not wage war unjustly: thus, whatever other right William may
have had in England, he could not claim kingship over his fellow Normans by
right of conquest. The subdued are under the conqueror's despotical authority,
but only those who actually took part in the fighting. Those who were governed
by the defeated aggressor do not become subject to the authority of the
victorious aggressor. They lacked the power to do an unjust thing, and so could
not have granted that power to their governors: the aggressor therefore was not
acting as their representative, and they cannot be punished for his actions.
And while the conqueror may seize the person of the vanquished aggressor in an
unjust war, he cannot seize the latter's property: he may not drive the
innocent wife and children of a villain into poverty for another's unjust acts.
While the property is technically that of the defeated, his innocent dependents
have a claim that the just conqueror must honor. He cannot seize more than the
vanquished could forfeit, and the latter had no right to ruin his dependents.
(He may, however, demand and take reparations for the damages suffered in the
war, so long as these leave enough in the possession of the aggressor's
dependants for their survival). In so arguing, Locke accomplishes two
objectives. First, he neutralizes the claims of those who see all authority
flowing from William I by the latter's right of conquest. In the absence of any
other claims to authority (e.g., Filmer's primogeniture from Adam, divine
anointment, etc.), all kings would have to found their authority on the consent
of the governed. Second, he removes much of the incentive for conquest in the
first place, for even in a just war the spoils are limited to the persons of
the defeated and reparations sufficient only to cover the costs of the war, and
even then only when the aggressor's territory can easily sustain such costs
(i.e., it can never be a profitable endeavor). Needless to say, the bare claim
that one's spoils are the just compensation for a just war does not suffice to
make it so, in Locke's view. Property. In the "Second Treatise", Locke claims
that civil society was created for the protection of property. In saying this,
he relies on the etymological root of "property," Latin "proprius", or what is
one's own, including oneself (cf. French "propre"). Thus, by "property" he
means "life, liberty, and estate." By saying that political society was
established for the better protection of property, he claims that it serves the
private (and non-political) interests of its constituent members: it does not
promote some good that can be realized only in community with others (e.g.,
virtue). For this account to work, individuals must possess some property
outside of society, i.e., in the state of nature: the state cannot be the sole
origin of property, declaring what belongs to whom. If the purpose of
government is the protection of property, the latter must exist independently
of the former. Filmer had said that, if there even were a state of nature
(which he denied), everything would be held in common: there could be no
private property, and hence no justice or injustice (injustice being understood
as treating someone else's goods, liberty, or life as if it were one's own).
Thomas Hobbes had argued the same thing. Locke therefore provides an account of
how material property could arise in the absence of government. He begins by
asserting that each individual, at a minimum, "owns" himself; this is a
corollary of each individual's being free and equal in the state of nature. As
a result, each must also own his own labor: to deny him his labor would be to
make him a slave. One can therefore take items from the common store of goods
by mixing one's labor with them: an apple on the tree is of no use to anyone
– it must be picked to be eaten – and the picking of that apple makes it
one's own. In an alternate argument, Locke claims that we must allow it to
become private property lest all mankind have starved, despite the bounty of
the world. A man must be allowed to eat, and thus have what he has eaten be his
own (such that he could deny others a right to use it). The apple is surely his
when he swallows it, when he chews it, when he bites into it, when he brings it
to his mouth, etc.: it became his as soon as he mixed his labor with it (by
picking it from the tree). This does not yet say "why" an individual is allowed
to take from the common store of nature. There is a necessity to do so in order
to eat, but this does not yet establish why others must respect one's property,
especially as they labor under the like necessity. Locke assures his readers
that the state of nature is a state of plenty: one may take from communal store
if one leaves a) enough and b) as good for others, and since nature is
bountiful, one can take all that one can use without taking anything "from"
someone else. Moreover, one can take only so much as one can use before it
spoils. There are then two provisos regarding what one can take, the "enough
and as good" condition and "spoilage." Gold does not rot. Neither does silver,
or any other precious metal or gem. They are, moreover, useless, their
aesthetic value not entering into the equation. One can heap up as much of them
as one wishes, or take them in trade for food. By the tacit consent of mankind,
they become a form of money (one accepts gold in exchange for apples with the
understanding that someone else will accept that gold in exchange for wheat).
One can therefore avoid the spoilage limitation by selling all that one has
amassed before it rots; the limits on acquisition thus disappear. In this way,
Locke argues that a full economic system could, in principle, exist within the
state of nature. Property could therefore predate the existence of government,
and thus society can be dedicated to the protection of property. In the 20th
century, Marxist scholars viewed Locke as the founder of bourgeois capitalism.
Those who were opposed to communism accepted this reading of Locke, and
celebrated him for it. He has therefore become associated with capitalism.
Representative government. Locke did not demand a republic. Rather, Locke felt
that a legitimate contract could easily exist between citizens and a monarchy,
an oligarchy or some mixed form ("2nd Tr.", sec. 132). Locke uses the term
Common-wealth to mean "not a democracy, or any form of government, but any
independent community" (sec. 133) and "whatever form the Common-wealth is
under, the Ruling Power ought to govern by declared and received laws, and not
by extemporary dictates and undetermined resolutions." (sec 137) Locke does,
however, make a distinction between an executive (e.g. a monarchy), a "Power
always in being" (sec 144) that must perpetually execute the law, and the
legislative that is the "supream power of the Common-wealth" (sec 134) and does
not have to be always in being. (sec 153) Furthermore, governments are charged
by the consent of the individual, "i.e. the consent of the majority, giving it
either by themselves, or their representatives chosen by them." (sec 140) His
ideas heavily influenced, however, both the American and French Revolutions.
His notions of people's rights and the role of civil government provided strong
support for the intellectual movements of both revolutions. Right of
revolution. The concept of the right of revolution was also taken up by John
Locke in Two Treatises of Government as part of his social contract theory.
Locke declared that under natural law, all people have the right to life,
liberty, and estate; under the social contract, the people could instigate a
revolution against the government when it acted against the interests of
citizens, to replace the government with one that served the interests of
citizens. In some cases, Locke deemed revolution an obligation. The right of
revolution thus essentially acted as a safeguard against tyranny. Reception and
Influence. Britain. Although the "Two Treatises" would become well known in the
second half of the 18th century, they were somewhat neglected when published.
Between 1689 and 1694, around 200 tracts and treatises were published
concerning the legitimacy of the Glorious Revolution. Three of these mention
Locke, two of which were written by friends of Locke. When Hobbes published the
"Leviathan" in 1651, by contrast, dozens of texts were immediately written in
response to it. As Mark Goldie explains: ""Leviathan" was a monolithic and
unavoidable presence for political writers in Restoration England in a way that
in the first half of the eighteenth the "Two Treatises" was not." While the
"Two Treatises" did not become popular until the 1760s, ideas from them did
start to become important earlier in the century. According to Goldie, "the
crucial moment was 1701" and "the occasion was the Kentish petition." The
pamphlet war that ensued was one of the first times Locke's ideas were invoked
in a public debate, most notably by Daniel Defoe. Locke's ideas did not go
unchallenged and the periodical "The Rehearsal", for example, launched a
"sustained and sophisticated assault” against the "Two Treatises" and
endorsed the ideology of patriarchalism. Not only did patriarchalism continue
to be a legitimate political theory in the 18th century, but as J. G. A. Pocock
and others have gone to great lengths to demonstrate, so was civic humanism and
classical republicanism. Pocock has argued that Locke's "Two Treatises" had
very little effect on British political theory; he maintains that there was no
contractarian revolution. Rather, he sees these other long-standing traditions
as far more important for 18th-century British politics. In the middle of the
18th century, Locke's position as a political philosopher suddenly rose in
prominence. For example, he was invoked by those arguing on behalf of the
American colonies during the Stamp Act debates of 1765-6. Marginalized groups
such as women, Dissenters and those campaigning to abolish the slave trade all
invoked Lockean ideals. But at the same time, as Goldie describes it, "a wind
of doubt about Locke’s credentials gathered into a storm. The sense that
Locke’s philosophy had been misappropriated increasingly turned to a
conviction that it was erroneous.” By the 1790s Locke was associated with
Rousseau and Voltaire and being blamed for the American and French Revolutions
as well as for the perceived secularization of society. By 1815, Locke's
portrait was taken down from Christ Church, his alma mater (it was later
restored to a position of prominence, and currently hangs in the dining hall of
the college). North America. Locke's influence during the American
Revolutionary period is disputed. While it is easy to point to specific
instances of Locke's "Two Treatises" being invoked, the extent of the
acceptance of Locke's ideals and the role they played in the American
Revolution are far from clear. The "Two Treatises" are echoed in phrases in the
Declaration of Independence and writings by Samuel Adams that attempted to gain
support for the rebellion. Of Locke's influence Thomas Jefferson wrote: "Bacon,
Locke and Newton I consider them as the three greatest men that have ever
lived, without any exception, and as having laid the foundation of those
superstructures which have been raised in the Physical & Moral sciences". The
colonists frequently cited Blackstone's "Commentaries on the Laws of England",
which synthesized Lockean political philosophy with the common law tradition.
Louis Hartz, writing at the beginning of the 20th century, took it for granted
that Locke was the political philosopher of the revolution. This view was
challenged by Bernard Bailyn and Gordon S. Wood, who argued that the revolution
was not a struggle over property, taxation, and rights, but rather "a
Machiavellian effort to preserve the young republic’s 'virtue' from the
corrupt and corrupting forces of English politics." Garry Wills, on the other
hand, maintains that it was neither the Lockean tradition nor the classical
republican tradition that drove the revolution, but instead Scottish moral
philosophy, a political philosophy that based its conception of society on
friendship, sensibility and the controlled passions. Thomas Pangle and Michael
Zuckert have countered, demonstrating numerous elements in the thought of more
influential founders that have a Lockean pedigree. Controversies regarding
interpretation. The "Second Treatise" was traditionally taken to be a
refutation of Thomas Hobbes's Leviathan, the latter's support of absolute
monarchism seemingly antithetical to Locke's ideal majoritarian government.
Scholarship in the 20th century has modified this view somewhat, though the
views of Locke that result from these interpretations often have little in
common. Leo Strauss in his "Natural Right and History" contentiously argues
that Locke is more or less Hobbesian in his conception of politics. Strauss
claims that the supposed egoism of Hobbes' natural law and the ostensible
altruism of Locke's can be reduced to an identical moral framework, one in
which people are to treat others as others treat them, to be selfless when
others are selfless, selfish when others are selfish. Strauss argued that Locke
only distanced himself from Hobbes rhetorically, in order to make his system
more publicly acceptable. In this way, Locke corrects Hobbes on Hobbesian
principles, and so should not be read as breaking from him philosophically. At
about the same time, C. B. Macpherson argued in his "Political Theory of
Possessive Individualism" that Hobbes and Locke stood together in laying the
groundwork for proto-capitalism. He saw them both as instigators of the liberal
tendency to view the subject as a possessive entity in an economic sense, and
argued that Locke's striking account of property rights in the state of nature
should be read primarily as a justification for market economic relationships.
The Cambridge School of political thought, led principally by Quentin Skinner,
John Pocock, Richard Ashcraft, and others, developed in opposition to
interpretations such as Strauss's and, to a lesser extent, Macpherson's. It
focuses on placing much of Locke's political philosophy within its historical
context, following the trail laid by Peter Laslett in the Introduction to his
edition of the "Two Treatises". Laslett argued that, contrary to the
traditional view that Locke had composed the "Two Treatises" in order to
legitimize the 1688 Glorious Revolution, they were actually written surrounding
the Exclusion Crisis a decade earlier. Laslett declined to establish a firm
relationship between Locke's thought and that of Hobbes, but did note some
similar themes. Richard Ashcraft argued in "Revolutionary Politics and Locke's
"Two Treatises of Government"" that Locke instead wrote the "Two Treatises"
later, and that he should therefore be associated with the Radical Whigs and
the intrigues surrounding the Rye House Plot and the Monmouth Rebellion. These
associations, and the economic system prevalent in England at the time,
Ashcraft argued, render Macpherson's interpretation historically implausible.
He also asserted that the absence of any reference to Hobbes, the questionable
utility of refuting Hobbes when he was a non-issue in the most immediate
debates, and the fact that Locke claims to have never read Hobbes or Spinoza,
"those justly-decried names," harms any interpretation that interprets Locke as
in any way responding to Hobbes. This last point is leveled most vociferously
against Strauss's interpretation. Regarding the relation between Locke's
thought and that of Hobbes, the core of the dispute centers on the literary
character of the "Two Treatises". Those who support a connection of any sort
treat the work as having been intended, at least in part, as a philosophic
tract, and therefore as potentially speaking beyond the immediate political
context. Those who deny such a connection insist that the "Two Treatises" are
nothing more than a particularly popular remnant of an ideologically driven
political contest, and were not meant to address any broader questions.
