Two-party system A two-party system is a system where two major political
parties dominate voting in nearly all elections at every level of government
and, as a result, all or nearly all elected offices are members of one of the
two major parties. Under a two-party system, one of the two parties typically
holds a majority in the legislature and is usually referred to as the "majority
party" while the other is the "minority party". While the term "two-party
system" is somewhat imprecise and has been used in different countries to mean
different things, there is considerable agreement that a system is considered
to be of a "two-party" nature when election results show consistently that all
or nearly all elected officials only belong to one of the two major parties,
such as in the United States. This can lead to nondemocratic measures that
reduce ballot access for other parties. In these cases, the chances for third
party candidates winning election to any office are remote, although it's
possible for groups within the larger parties, or in opposition to one or both
of them, to exert influence on the two major parties. Examples. There is strong
agreement that the United States has a two-party system; historically, there
have been few instances in which third party candidates won an election. In
countries such as Britain and Spain, two major parties emerge which have strong
influence and tend to elect most of the candidates, but a multitude of lesser
parties exist with varying degrees of influence, and sometimes these lesser
parties are able to elect officials who participate in the legislature. A
report in the "Christian Science Monitor", for example, suggested that Spain
was moving towards a "greater two-party system" while acknowledging that Spain
has "many small parties." In political systems based on the Westminster system,
which is a particular style of parliamentary democracy based on the British
model and found in many commonwealth countries, a majority party will form the
government and the minority party will form the opposition, and coalitions of
lesser parties are possible; in the rare circumstance in which neither party is
the majority, a hung parliament arises. Sometimes these systems are described
as "two-party systems" but they are usually referred to as "multi-party"
systems. There is not always a sharp boundary between a two-party system and a
multi-party system. Generally, a two-party system becomes a dichotomous
division of the political spectrum with an ostensibly right-wing and left-wing
party: Nationalist Party vs. Labour Party in Malta, Liberal vs. Labor in
Australia, Republicans vs. Democrats in the United States and the Conservative
Party vs. the Labour Party in the United Kingdom Examples of countries with
two-party systems include the United States, Jamaica and Malta. Other parties
in these countries may have seen candidates elected to local or subnational
office, however. Historian John Hicks claims that the United States has never
possessed for any considerable period of time the two party system in its pure
and undefiled form. In some governments, certain chambers may resemble a two-
party system and others a multi-party system. For example, the politics of
Australia are largely two-party (if the Liberal Party and National Party are
considered the same party at a national level due to their long-standing
alliance) for the Australian House of Representatives, which is elected by
Instant Runoff Voting, (known within Australia as preferential voting).
However, third parties are more common in the Australian Senate, which uses a
proportional voting system more amenable to minor parties. India too is showing
characteristics of two party system with United Progressive Alliance (UPA) and
National Democratic Alliance (NDA) as the two main players. It is to be noted
that both UPA and NDA are not two political parties but alliances of several
smaller parties. Other smaller parties not aligned with either NDA or UPA
exist. The Politics of Malta are somewhat unusual in that while the electoral
system is single transferable vote (STV), traditionally associated with
proportional representation, minor parties have not earned much success. No
third parties won any seats in the Parliament in Malta's most recent 2009
election, for example. The Labour Party and the Nationalist Party are the
dominant parties. This is not the most common party system. Causes. There are
several reasons why, in some systems, two major parties dominate the political
landscape. There has been speculation that a two-party system arose in the
United States from early political battling between the federalists and anti-
federalists in the first few decades after the ratification of the
Constitution, according to several views. In addition, there has been more
speculation that the winner-takes-all electoral system as well as particular
state and federal laws regarding voting procedures helped to cause a two-party
system. In contrast, a voting system that allows only a single winner for each
possible legislative seat is sometimes termed a plurality voting system or
single-winner voting system and is usually described under the heading of a
"winner–takes–all" arrangement. Each voter can cast a single vote for any
candidate within any given legislative district, but the candidate with the
most votes wins the seat, although variants, such as requiring a majority, are
sometimes used. What happens is that in a general election, a party that
consistently comes in third in every district is unlikely to win any
legislative seats even if there is a significant proportion of the electorate
favoring its positions. This arrangement strongly favors large and
well–organized political parties that are able to appeal to voters in many
districts and hence win many seats, and discourages smaller or regional
parties. Politically-oriented people consider their only realistic way to
capture political power is to be either a Republican or Democrat. In the U.S.
model, forty-eight states have a standard "winner-takes-all" electoral system
for amassing presidential votes in the Electoral College system. The
"winner–takes–all" principle applies in presidential elections, since if a
presidential candidate gets the most votes in any particular state, "all" of
the electoral votes from that state are awarded. In all but two states, Maine
and Nebraska, the presidential candidate winning a plurality of votes wins all
of the electoral votes, a practice called the unit rule. Duverger concluded
that "plurality election single-ballot procedures are likely to produce two-
party systems whereas proportional representation and runoff designs encourage
multipartyism." He suggested there were two reasons why "winner–takes–all"
systems leads to a two-party system. First, the weaker parties are pressured to
form an alliance, sometimes called a "fusion", to try to become big enough to
challenge a large dominant party and, in so doing, gain political clout in the
legislature. Second, voters learn, over time, not to vote for candidates
outside of one of the two large parties since their votes for third party
candidates are usually ineffectual. As a result, weaker parties are eliminated
by the voters over time. Duverger pointed to statistics and tactics to suggest
that voters tended to gravitate towards one of the two main parties, which he
called "polarization", and tend to shun third parties. For example, some
analysts suggest that the Electoral College system in the United States, by
favoring a system of winner–takes–all in presidential elections, is a
structural choice favoring only two major parties. Third parties. Third
parties, meaning a party other than one of the two dominant parties, are
possible in two-party systems, but they are unlikely to exert much influence by
gaining control of legislatures or by winning elections. While there are
occasional opinions in the media expressed about the possibility of third
parties emerging in the United States, for example, political insiders such as
the 1980 presidential candidate John Anderson think the chances of one
appearing in the early twenty-first century is remote. A report in "The
Guardian" suggested that American politics has been "stuck in a two-way fight
between Republicans and Democrats" since the Civil War, and that third-party
runs had little meaningful success. When third parties are built around an
ideology which is at odds with the majority mindset, many members belong to
such a party not for the purpose of expecting electoral success but rather for
personal or psychological reasons. In the U.S., third parties include older
ones such as the Libertarian Party and the Green Party and newer ones such as
the Pirate Party. Many believe that third parties don't affect American
politics by winning elections, but they can act as "spoilers" by taking votes
from one of the two major parties. They act like barometers of change in the
political mood since they push the major parties to consider their demands. An
analysis in "New York Magazine" by Ryan Lizza in 2006 suggested that third
parties arose from time to time in the nineteenth century around single-issue
movements such as abolition, women's suffrage, and the direct election of
senators, but were less prominent in the twentieth century. A so-called "third
party" in the United Kingdom are the Liberal Democrats. In the 2010 election,
the Liberal Democrats received 23% of the votes but only 9% of the seats in the
House of Commons. While electoral results do not necessarily translate into
legislative seats, the Liberal Democrats can exert influence if there is a
situation such as a hung parliament. In this instance, neither of the two main
parties (at present, the Conservative Party and the Labour Party) have
sufficient authority to run the government. Accordingly, the Liberal Democrats
can in theory exert tremendous influence in such a situation since they can
ally with one of the two main parties to form a coalition. This happened in the
Coalition government of 2010. Yet in that more than 13% of the seats in the
British House of Commons are held in 2011 by representatives of political
parties other than the two leading political parties of that nation,
contemporary Britain is considered by some to be a multi-party system, and not
a two-party system. Advantages. Some historians have suggested that two-party
systems promote centrism and encourages political parties to find common
positions which appeal to wide swaths of the electorate. It can lead to
political stability which leads, in turn, to economic growth. Historian Patrick
Allitt of the Teaching Company suggested that it is difficult to overestimate
the long term economic benefits of political stability. Sometimes two-party
systems have been seen as preferable to multi-party systems because they are
simpler to govern, with less fractiousness and harmony, while multi-party
systems can sometimes lead to hung parliaments. Italy, with a multi-party
system, has had years of divisive politics since 2000, although analyst Silvia
Aloisi suggested in 2008 that the nation may be moving closer to a two-party
arrangement. Disadvantages. There have been arguments that the winner-take-all
mechanism discourages independent or third-party candidates from running for
office or promulgating their views. Ross Perot's former campaign manager wrote
that the problem with having only two parties is that the nation loses "the
ability for things to bubble up from the body politic and give voice to things
that aren’t being voiced by the major parties." One analyst suggested that
parliamentary systems, which typically are multi-party in nature, lead to a
better "centralization of policy expertise" in government. Multi-party
governments permit wider and more diverse viewpoints in government, and
encourage dominant parties to make deals with weaker parties to form winning
coalitions. While there is considerable debate about the relative merits of a
constitutional arrangement such as that of the United States versus a
parliamentary arrangement such as Britain, analysts have noted that most
democracies around the world have chosen the British multi-party model. Analyst
Chris Weigant of the "Huffington Post" wrote that "the parliamentary system is
inherently much more open to minority parties getting much better
representation than third parties do in the American system."
