Two-part tariff A two-part tariff is a price discrimination technique in which
the price of a product or service is composed of two parts - a lump-sum fee as
well as a per-unit charge. In general, price discrimination techniques only
occur in partially or fully monopolistic markets. It is designed to enable the
firm to capture more consumer surplus than it otherwise would in a non-
discriminating pricing environment. Two-part tariffs may also exist in
competitive markets when consumers are uncertain about their ultimate demand.
Health club consumers, for example, may be uncertain about their level of
future commitment to an exercise regime. Depending on the homogeneity of
demand, the lump-sum fee charged varies, but the rational firm will set the per
unit charge above or equal to the marginal cost of production, and below or
equal to the price the firm would charge in a perfect monopoly. Under
competition the per-unit price is set below marginal cost. An important element
to remember concerning two-part tariffs is that it is still price
discrimination, of which an important feature is that the product or service
offered by the firm must be identical to all consumers, hence, price charged
may vary, but "not due to different costs borne by the firm", as this would
infer a differentiated product. Thus, while credit cards which charge an annual
fee plus a per-transaction fee is a good example of a two-part tariff, a fixed
fee charged by a car rental company in addition to a per-kilometre fuel fee is
not so good, because the fixed fee may reflect fixed costs such as registration
and insurance which the firm must recoup in this manner. This can make the
identification of two-part tariffs difficult. A two-part tariff when consumer
demand is homogeneous. When consumers have homogeneous demand, any one consumer
is representative of the market (the market being n identical consumers). For
purposes of demonstration, consider just one consumer who interacts with one
firm which experiences no fixed costs and constant costs per unit - hence the
horizontal marginal cost (MC) line. Recall that the demand curve represents our
consumer’s maximum willingness to pay for any given output. Thus, as long as
he receives an appropriate amount of goods, such as Qc, then he will be willing
to pay his entire surplus (ABC) in addition to the cost per unit under perfect
competition (Pc by Qc) - i.e. the entire area under the demand curve up to
point Qc. If the firm is perfectly competitive, it would charge price Pc and
supply Qc to our consumer, making no economic profit but producing an
allocatively efficient output. If the firm is a "non-price discriminating"
monopolist, it would charge price Pm per unit and supply Qm, maximizing profit
but producing below the allocatively efficient level of output Qc. This
situation yields economic profit for the firm equal to the green area B,
consumer surplus equal to the light blue area A, and a deadweight loss equal to
the purple area C. If the firm is a "price discriminating" monopolist, then it
has the capacity to extract more resources from the consumer. It charges a lump
sum fee, as well as a per unit cost. In order to sell the maximum number of
units, the firm must charge the perfectly competitive price per unit, Pc,
because this is the only price at which Qc units can be sold (note this is also
the marginal cost per unit). To make up for the lower cost per unit, the firm
then imposes a fee upon our consumer equal to her consumer surplus, ABC. The
lump-sum fee enables the firm to capture all the consumer surplus and
deadweight loss areas, resulting in higher profit than a non-price
discriminating monopolist could manage. The result is a firm which is in a
sense allocatively efficient (price per unit is equal to marginal cost, but
total price is not) - one of the redeeming qualities of price discrimination.
If there are multiple consumers with homogeneous demand, then profit will equal
n times the area ABC, where n is the number of consumers. A two-part tariff
when consumer demand is different. We now consider the case where there are two
consumers, X and Y. Consumer Y's demand is exactly twice consumer X's demand,
and each of these consumers is represented by a separate demand curve, and
their combined demand (Dmarket). The firm is the same as in the previous
example. We assume that the firm "cannot separately identify each consumer" -
it cannot therefore price discriminate against each of them individually. The
firm would like to follow the same logic as before and charge a per-unit price
of Pc while imposing a lump-sum fee equal to area ABCD - the largest consumer
surplus of the two consumers. In so doing, however, the firm will be pricing
consumer X out of the market, because the lump-sum fee far exceeds his own
consumer surplus of area AC. Nevertheless, this would still yield profit equal
ABCD from consumer Y. A solution to pricing consumer X out of the market is to
instead charge a lump-sum fee equal to area AC, and continue to charge Pc per
unit. Profit in this instance equals twice the area AC (two consumers): 2 x AC.
As it turns out, since consumer Y's demand is twice consumer X's, ABCD = 2 x
AC. The profit is the same and the producer is indifferent to either of these
pricing possibilities, although consumer Y is better off this way since she
gets consumer surplus BD. However, it is possible for the firm to earn even
greater profits. Assume it sets the unit price equal to Pm, and imposes a lump-
sum fee equal to area A. Both consumers again remain in the market, except now
the firm is making a profit on each unit sold - total market profit from the
sale of Qm units at price Pm is equal to area CDE. Profit from the lump-sum fee
is 2 x A = AB. Total profit is therefore area ABCDE. Thus, by charging a higher
per unit price and a lower lump-sum fee, the firm has generated area E more
profit than if it had charged a lower per-unit price and a higher lump-sum fee.
Note that the firm is no longer producing the allocatively efficient output,
and there is a deadweight loss experienced by society equal to area F - this is
a result of the exercise of monopoly power. Consumer X is left with no consumer
surplus, while Consumer Y is left with area B. Examples of two-part tariffs.
The following items could be identified as two part tariffs; but it is possible
some of them could be debated on the basis of the presence of fixed costs such
as insurance which the firm cannot recoup in any other way.
