Tying (commerce) In a tying sale, a customer is required to buy something they
do not want as a condition of buying something they do want. Tying is the
practice of making the sale of one good (the tying good) or service to the de
facto customer (or de jure customer) conditional on the purchase of a second
distinctive good (the tied good) or service. It is often illegal when the
products are not naturally related, for example requiring a bookstore to stock
an unpopular title before allowing them to purchase a bestseller. Tying is
related to freebie marketing, which was pioneered by King C. Gillette and is a
common (and legal) method of giving away (or selling at a substantial discount)
one item to ensure a continual flow of sales of another related item. Some
kinds of tying, especially by contract, have historically been regarded as
anti-competitive practices. The basic idea is that consumers are harmed by
being forced to buy an undesired good (the tied good) in order to purchase a
good they actually want (the tying good), and so would prefer that the goods be
sold separately. The company doing this bundling may have a significantly large
market share so that it may impose the tie on consumers, despite the forces of
market competition. The tie may also harm other companies in the market for the
tied good, or who sell only single components. One effect of tying can be that
low quality products achieve a higher market share than would otherwise be the
case. Tying may also be a form of price discrimination: people who use more
razor blades, for example, pay more than those who just need a one-time shave.
Though this may improve overall welfare, by giving more consumers access to the
market, such price discrimination can also transfer consumer surpluses to the
producer. Tying may also be used with or in place of patents or copyrights to
help protect entry into a market, discouraging innovation. Tying is often used
when the supplier makes one product that is critical to many customers. By
threatening to withhold that key product unless others are also purchased, the
supplier can increase sales of less necessary products. In the United States,
most states have laws against tying, which are enforced by state governments.
In addition, the U.S.¬ Department of Justice enforces federal laws against
tying through its Antitrust Division. Types of tying. Horizontal tying is the
practice of requiring consumers to pay for an unrelated product or service
together with the desired one. A hypothetical example would be for Bic to sell
its pens only with Bic lighters. (However, a company may offer a limited free
item with another purchase as a promotion.) Vertical tying is the practice of
requiring customers to purchase related products or services together, from the
same company. For example, a company might mandate that its automobiles could
only be serviced by its own dealers. In an effort to curb this, many
jurisdictions require that warranties not be voided by outside servicing; for
example, see the Magnuson-Moss Warranty Act in the United States. In United
States law. Certain tying arrangements are illegal in the United States under
both the Sherman Antitrust Act, and Section 3 of the Clayton Act. A tying
arrangement is defined as "an agreement by a party to sell one product but only
on the condition that the buyer also purchases a different (or tied) product,
or at least agrees he will not purchase the product from any other supplier."
Tying may be the action of several companies as well as the work of just one
firm. Success on a tying claim typically requires proof of four elements: (1)
two separate products or services are involved; (2) the purchase of the tying
product is conditioned on the additional purchase of the tied product; (3) the
seller has sufficient market power in the market for the tying product; (4) a
not insubstantial amount of interstate commerce in the tied product market is
affected. For at least three decades, the Supreme Court defined the required
"economic power" to include just about any departure from perfect competition,
going so far as to hold that possession of a copyright or even the existence of
a tie itself gave rise to a presumption of economic power. The Supreme Court
has since held that a plaintiff must establish the sort of market power
necessary for other antitrust violations in order to prove sufficient "economic
power" necessary to establish a per se tie. More recently, the Court has
eliminated any presumption of market power based solely on the fact that the
tying product is patented or copyrighted. In recent years, changing business
practices surrounding new technologies have put the legality of tying
arrangements to the test. Tying of Apple products. The tying of Apple products
is an example of commercial tying that has caused recent controversy. When
Apple initially released the iPhone on June 29, 2007, it was sold exclusively
with AT&T (formerly Cingular) contracts in the United States. To enforce this
exclusivity, Apple employed a type of software "lock" that ensured the phone
would not work on any network besides AT&T's. Related to the concept of
bricking, any user who tried to unlock or otherwise tamper with the locking
software ran the risk of rendering their iPhone permanently inoperable. This
caused complaints among many consumers, as they were forced to pay an
additional early termination fee of $175 if they wanted to unlock the device
safely for use on a different carrier. Other companies such as Google
complained that tying encourages a more closed access based wireless service.
Many questioned the legality of the arrangement, and in October 2007 a class-
action lawsuit was filed against Apple, claiming that its exclusive agreement
with AT&T violates California antitrust law. The suit was filed by the Law
Office of Damian R. Fernandez on behalf of California resident Timothy P.
Smith, and ultimately sought to have an injunction issued against Apple to
prevent it from selling iPhones with any kind of software lock. In July 2010,
federal regulators clarified the issue when they determined it was lawful to
hack (or in other terms, "jail break") the iPhone, declaring that there was no
basis for copyright law to assist Apple in protecting its restrictive business
model. Jail breaking is a common term used to describe a situation in which a
person hacks into the operating system of an iPhone (or other device) in an
attempt to unlock it. If done successfully, this would allow the hacker to run
any application on the phone they choose, including applications not authorized
by Apple. Apple told regulators that modifying the iPhone operating system
leads to the creation of an infringing derivative work that is protected by
copyright law. This means that the license on the operating system forbids
software modification. Regulators agreed that the activity of an iPhone owner
who modifies his or her iPhone's firmware/operating system in order to enable
it to run an application that Apple has not approved, but that the iPhone owner
wishes to run on the iPhone, fits comfortably within the four corners of fair
use. Tying of Microsoft products. Another prominent case involving a tying
claim (among many others) was "United States v. Microsoft". By some accounts,
Microsoft ties together Microsoft Windows, Internet Explorer, Windows Media
Player, Outlook Express and Microsoft Office. The United States claimed that
the bundling of Internet Explorer (IE) to sales of Windows 98, making IE
difficult to remove from Windows 98 (e.g., not putting it on the "Remove
Programs" list), and designing Windows 98 to work "unpleasantly" with Netscape
Navigator constituted an illegal tying of Windows 98 and IE. Microsoft's
counterargument was that a web browser and a mail reader are simply part of an
operating system, included with other personal computer operating systems, and
the integration of the products was technologically justified. Just as the
definition of a car has changed to include things that used to be separate
products, such as speedometers and radios, Microsoft claimed the definition of
an operating system has changed to include these formerly separate products.
The United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit
rejected Microsoft's claim that Internet Explorer was simply one facet of its
operating system, but the court held that the tie between Windows and Internet
Explorer should be analyzed deferentially under the Rule of Reason. The U.S.
government claim settled before reaching final resolution. As to the tying of
Office, parallel cases against Microsoft brought by State Attorneys General
included a claim for harm in the market for office productivity applications.
The Attorneys General abandoned this claim when filing an amended complaint.
The claim was revived by Novell where they alleged that manufacterers of
computers ("OEMs") were charged less for their Windows bulk purchases if they
agreed to bundle Office with every PC sold than if they gave computer
purchasers the choice whether or not to buy Office along with their machines
‚Äî making their computer prices less competitive in the market. The Novell
litigation is still ongoing. The Bank Holding Company Act's anti-tying
provision. In 1970, Congress enacted section 106 of the Bank Holding Company
Act Amendments of 1970 (BHCA), the anti-tying provision, which is codified at
12 U.S.C. ¬ß 1972. The statute was designed to prevent banks, whether large or
small, state or federal, from imposing anticompetitive conditions on their
customers. Tying, of course, is an antitrust violation, but the Sherman and
Clayton Acts did not adequately protect borrowers from being required to accept
conditions to loans issued by banks; and section 106 was specifically designed
to apply to and remedy such bank misconduct. Banks are allowed to take measures
to protect their loans and to safeguard the value of their investments, such as
requiring security or guaranties from borrowers. The statute exempts so-called
‚Äútraditional banking practices‚Äù from its per se illegality, and thus its
purpose is not so much to limit banks' lending practices, as it is to ensure
that the practices used are fair and competitive. A majority of claims brought
under the BHCA are denied. Banks still have quite a bit of leeway in fashioning
loan agreements, but when a bank clearly steps over the bounds of propriety,
the plaintiff is compensated with treble damages. At least four regulatory
agencies including the Federal Reserve Board oversee the activities of banks,
their holding companies, and other related depository institutions. While each
type of depository institution has a ‚Äúprimary regulator‚Äù, the nation‚Äôs
‚Äúdual banking‚Äù system allows concurrent jurisdiction among the different
regulatory agencies. With respect to the anti-tying provision, the Fed takes
the preeminent role in relation to the other financial institution regulatory
agencies, which reflects that fact that it was considered the least biased (in
favor of banks) of the regulatory agencies when section 106 was enacted.
Criticism of laws banning tying. Scholars from various schools of antitrust
policy have been consistently critical of the per se rule against tying
contracts. Some, particularly those in the Chicago School of economic thought,
argue that such contracts are generally employed to effect otherwise lawful
price discrimination. Chicagoans have also argued that a firm with power in the
market for the tying product cannot enhance its profit by employing power over
the tying product to gain influence in the market for the tied product. Thus,
these scholars assumed that firms employed market power to impose tying
contracts, but that such contracts were nonetheless harmless or even
beneficial. Other scholars argue that ties can be methods of overcoming market
failures that unbridled rivalry might otherwise produce. For instance, some
economists have argued that a franchiser may employ tying contracts to ensure
that franchisees with little repeat business purchase inputs of sufficient
quality. Absent such agreements, it is said, some franchisees will have an
incentive to use the franchise system's trademark to lure unsuspecting
customers and then provide the customer substandard service, to the detriment
of the reputation associated with the trademark. These scholars argue that
courts should analyze tying contracts under the Rule of Reason.
