Tyrant A tyrant (Greek , "tyrannos") was originally one who illegally seized
and controlled a governmental power in a polis. Tyrants were a group of
individuals who took over many Greek poleis during the uprising of the middle
classes in the sixth and seventh centuries BC, ousting the aristocratic
governments. Plato and Aristotle define a tyrant as, "one who rules without
law, looks to his own advantage rather than that of his subjects, and uses
extreme and cruel tactics—against his own people as well as others". In
common usage, the word "tyrant" carries connotations of a harsh and cruel ruler
who places his or her own interests or the interests of an oligarchy over the
best interests of the general population, which the tyrant governs or controls.
The Greek term carried no pejorative connotation during the Archaic and early
Classical periods but was clearly a bad word to Plato, and on account of the
decisive influence of political philosophy its negative connotations only
increased down into the Hellenistic period, becoming synonymous with
"Authenteo" - another term which carried authoritarian connotations around the
turn of the first century A.D. During the seventh and sixth centuries BC,
tyranny was often looked upon as an intermediate stage between narrow oligarchy
and more democratic forms of polity. However, in the late fifth and fourth
centuries, a new kind of tyrant, the military dictator, arose, specifically in
Sicily. Etymology. The English noun "tyrant" appears in Middle English use, via
Old French, from the 1290s. The word derives from Latin "tyrannus", meaning
"illegitimate ruler", and this in turn from the Greek "monarch, ruler of a
polis". The final "-t" arises in Old French by association with the present
participles in "-ant". Greek is itself a loanword from a pre-Greek source, like
βασιλεύς, and perhaps also ἄναξ, a loan from a superstrate
semantic sphere. Speculations on Tyrrhenian origin connect the Etruscan theonym
"Turan" for Venus (perhaps from an epitheton "*Lady", paired with Atunis
"*Lord") and the ethnonym of the Tyrrhenians itself. Historical forms. In
ancient Greece, tyrants were influential opportunists that came to power by
securing the support of different factions of a deme. The word "tyrannos",
possibly pre-Greek, Pelasgian or eastern in origin, then carried no ethical
censure; it simply referred to anyone, good or bad, who obtained executive
power in a polis by unconventional means. Support for the tyrants came from the
growing middle class and from the peasants who had no land or were in debt to
the wealthy land owners. It is true that they had no legal right to rule, but
the people preferred them over kings or the aristocracy. The Greek tyrants
stayed in power by using mercenary soldiers from outside of their respective
city-state. To mock tyranny, Thales wrote that the strangest thing to see is
""an aged tyrant"" meaning that tyrants do not have the public support to
survive for long. Corinth. In Corinth, growing wealth from colonial
enterprises, and the wider horizons brought about by the export of wine and
oil, together with the new experiences of the Eastern Mediterranean brought
back by returning mercenary hoplites employed overseas allowed Cypselus, the
first tyrant of Corinth in the 7th century BC, to overthrow the aristocratic
power of the dominant but unpopular Bacchiadae, who were killed, executed,
driven out and exiled in 657 BC. Corinth prospered economically under his rule
and Cypselus manages to rule without a bodyguard but when he managed to
bequeath his position to his son, Periander, whose position was less secure,
his son required a bodyguard of mercenary soldiers personally loyal to himself.
Nevertheless, under Cypselus and Periander, Corinth extended and tightened her
control over her colonial enterprises, and exports of Corinthian pottery
flourished. However, tyrants seldom succeeded in establishing an untroubled
line of succession. Periander's successor was less fortunate and was expelled.
Afterward, Corinth was ruled by a lackluster oligarchy, and was eventually
eclipsed by the rising powers of Athens and Sparta. Athens. In Athens, the
inhabitants first gave the title of tyrant to Peisistratus, a relative of
Solon, the Athenian lawgiver, who succeeded in 546 BC, after 2 failed attempts,
to install himself as tyrant. Supported by prosperity of the peasantry and
landowning interests of the plain (prospering from the rise of olive exports),
and his clients from Marathon, he managed to achieve supreme power. Through an
ambitious program of public works, by fostering the state cult of Athena, by
encouraging the creation of festivals and supporting the Panathenaean games, in
which prizes were jars of olive oil, and in his support of the Dionosia
(leading to the development of Athenian drama) Peisistratus managed to maintain
his personal popularity. He was followed by his sons, and with the subsequent
growth of Athenian democracy, the title "tyrant" took on its familiar negative
connotations. The murder of his son, the tyrant Hipparchus by Aristogeiton and
Harmodios in Athens in 514 BC marked the beginning of the so-called "cult of
the tyrannicides" (i.e., of killers of tyrants). Contempt for tyranny
characterised this cult movement. Despite financial help from Persia, in 510
the Peisistratids were expelled by a combination of intrigue, exile and Spartan
arms. The anti-tyrannical attitude became especially prevalent in Athens after
508 BC, when Cleisthenes reformed the political system so that it resembled
"demokratia" (ancient participant democracy as opposed to the modern
representative democracy). The Thirty Tyrants whom the Spartans imposed on a
defeated Attica in 404 BC would not be classified as tyrants in the usual sense
and were in effect an oligarchy. Aesymnetes. An aesymnetes (pl. aesymnetai) had
similar scope of power to the tyrant, such as Pittacus of Mytilene (c. 640-568
BC), and was elected for life or for a specified period by a city-state in a
time of crisis—the only difference being that the aesymnetes was a
constitutional office and was comparable to the Roman dictator. Magistrates in
some city-states were also called aesymnetai. Archaic tyrants. The heyday of
the Archaic period tyrants came in the early 6th century BC, when Cleisthenes
ruled Sicyon in the Peloponnesus and Polycrates ruled Samos. During this time,
revolts overthrew many governments in the Aegean world. Chilon, the ambitious
and capable ephor of Sparta, built a strong alliance amongst neighbouring
states by making common cause with these groups seeking to oppose unpopular
tyrannical rule. By intervening against the tyrants of Sicyon, Corinth and
Athens, Sparta thus came to assume Hellenic leadership prior to the Persian
invasions. Simultaneously Persia first started making inroads into Greece, and
many tyrants sought Persian help against forces seeking to remove them.
Populism. Greek tyranny in the main grew out of the struggle of the popular
classes against the aristocracy or against priest-kings where archaic
traditions and mythology sanctioned hereditary and/or traditional rights to
rule. Popular coups generally installed tyrants, who often became or remained
popular rulers, at least in the early part of their reigns. For instance, the
popular imagination remembered Peisistratus for an episode - related by
(pseudonymous) Aristotle, but possibly fictional - in which he exempted a
farmer from taxation because of the particular barrenness of his plot.
Peisistratus' sons Hippias and Hipparchus, on the other hand, were not such
able rulers, and when the disaffected aristocrats Harmodios and Aristogeiton
slew Hipparchus, Hippias' rule quickly became oppressive, resulting in the
expulsion of the Peisistratids in 510 BC, who resided henceforth in Persepolis
as clients of the Persian Shahanshah (King of kings). Sicilian tyrants. The
tyrannies of Sicily came about due to similar causes, but here the threat of
Carthaginian attack prolonged tyranny, facilitating the rise of military
leaders with the people united behind them. Such Sicilian tyrants as Gelo,
Hiero I, Hiero II, Dionysius the Elder, Dionysius the Younger, and Agathocles
maintained lavish courts and became patrons of culture. Roman tyrants. Niccolò
Machiavelli, building on this opposition, conflates all rule by a single person
(whom he generally refers to as a "prince") with "tyranny," regardless of the
legitimacy of that rule, in his "Discourses on Livy". He also identifies
liberty with republican regimes; whether he would include so-called "crowned
republics" (such as modern constitutional monarchies) is somewhat unclear from
the text. In the arts. Ancient Greeks, as well as the Roman Republicans, became
generally quite wary of anyone seeking to implement a popular coup. Shakespeare
portrays the struggle of one such anti-tyrannical Roman, Marcus Junius Brutus,
in his play "Julius Caesar". Enlightenment. In the Enlightenment, thinkers
applied the word tyranny to the system of governance that had developed around
aristocracy and monarchy. Specifically, John Locke as part of his argument
against the "Divine Right of Kings" in his book "Two Treatises of Government"
defines it this way: “Tyranny is the exercise of power beyond right, which
nobody can have a right to; and this is making use of the power any one has in
his hands, not for the good of those who are under it, but for his own private,
separate advantage.” Locke's concept of tyranny influenced the writers of
subsequent generations who developed the concept of tyranny as counterpoint to
ideas of human rights and democracy. Thomas Jefferson referred to the tyranny
of King George III of Great Britain in the Declaration of Independence, and the
concept was refined in turn to refer to the Kings of France, the tyrants of the
Terror, and to Napoleon I in turn during the French Revolution and subsequent
regimes.
