U.S. Committee for Human Rights in North Korea The Committee for Human Rights
in North Korea (HRNK), formerly known as the U.S. Committee for Human Rights in
North Korea, is a Washington D.C.-based non-governmental research organization
that “seeks to raise awareness about conditions in North Korea and to publish
research that focuses the world’s attention on human rights abuses in that
country.” Founded in 2001 by a group of foreign policy and human rights
specialists, HRNK has published twelve reports on issues relevant to North
Korean human rights today. The Committee’s leadership has testified to
Congress about North Korean human rights and China’s forced repatriation of
North Korean refugees. In April 2012, HRNK held its first major conference on
North Korean human rights to launch its publication, "The Hidden Gulag, Second
Edition" on North Korean political prison camps. History. Establishment.
Founded in 2001 by a group of foreign policy and human rights specialists, HRNK
filled a major gap in non-governmental expertise on North Korea. Well-
established organizations such as Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch
initially found it difficult to incorporate North Korea, where information is
notoriously challenging to obtain, into traditional models of research and
advocacy. HRNK, an explicitly non-partisan research organization, began to
break new ground in 2003 with the first edition of The Hidden Gulag by David
Hawk. This was the first comprehensive study of North Korea’s prison camp
system. Non-Partisan Credibility. From the beginning, HRNK cultivated its image
as a non-partisan holder of expertise on North Korea in the United States.
Early members of the Board of Directors included individuals with varying
political affiliations and policy prescriptions—including Chuck Downs,
Nicholas Eberstadt, Carl Gershman, Morton Abramowitz, and Samantha Powers. Co-
chairs of the Board of Directors included US Representative Stephen J. Solarz
and Ambassador James R. Lilley, for whom the North Korean Human Rights Act of
2001 is named. Solarz, a former New York Democratic congressman, was known as
the “Marco Polo of Congress” for his long record of international travel
and involvement in foreign affairs. Most notably, he was the first American
politician to visit Kim Il-sung. Lilley was personally close to former
President George HW Bush and served as Ambassador to the Republic of Korea and
the People’s Republic of China. Both Solarz and Lilley garnered respect from
both sides of the aisle and emphasized a spirit of bipartisan comity. "Hidden
Gulag" Conference. HRNK hosted its first major conference on the "Hidden
Gulag," addressing North Korea’s network of political prison camps, in
Washington D.C. on April 10, 2012. HRNK launched its publication, the second
edition of "The Hidden Gulag" by former Amnesty International Executive
Director and human rights specialist David Hawk, at the conference. The
conference attracted significant media attention, including an editorial in The
Washington Post that touted the conference as “unprecedented. Robert King,
the U.S. Special Envoy for North Korean Human Rights Issues, addressed the
conference. Glyn Davies, the U.S. Special Representative for North Korean
Policy, was also in attendance. Publications. HRNK has released 12 publications
on North Korean human rights, based on independent research and the testimony
of North Korean defectors. The most recent publications have addressed the
North Korean security apparatus, North Korea’s “songbun” social
classification system, and the Kim regime’s network of “hidden gulag”
political prison camps. HRNK and Congress. In September 2011, HRNK Executive
Director Greg Scarlatoiu testified at a hearing of the House Foreign Affairs
Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health, and Human Rights entitled “Human
Rights in North Korea: Challenges and Opportunities.” Scarlatoiu particularly
emphasized the flow of information into North Korea, recommending on behalf of
HRNK that “the United States should continue to expand radio broadcasting
into North Korea and encourage other efforts that provide information directly
to the North Korean people in accordance with the North Korean Human Rights
Act.” The Congressional-Executive Commission on China received testimony from
HRNK Chair Roberta Cohen and Executive Director Greg Scarlatoiu on March 5,
2012 at a hearing on “China’s Repatriation of North Korean Refugees.”
HRNK presented six recommendations to the Commission and encouraged China to
fulfill international obligations to protect North Korean refugees. Board of
Directors. HRNK's Board of Directors includes prominent individuals from the
North Korea and human rights policy communities. Roberta Cohen Senior Vice
President and Head of Government Affairs, Thomson Reuters Nicholas Eberstadt
Henry Wendt Chair in Political Economy at the American Enterprise Institute
