UK Social Centre Network The UK Social Centre Network is a grass roots
initiative to establish a network between self identified radical independent
community social centres in the United Kingdom. There is no single policy
statement but a general desire to improve communication and co-operation
between the growing number of autonomous spaces ""to share resources, ideas and
information"". Self selected participants draw a clear distinction between
their radical autonomous spaces on one side and the state or large NGO
sponsored community centres on the other. While there has been something of a
tradition of social spaces in occupied buildings (also known as squatting),
recent years have seen an upsurge in the creation of social centres in rented
or purchased buildings. The network of social centres in the UK is very much in
its infancy compared to some other places in Europe such as Holland, Italy and
Spain, although it can trace its roots back to the autonomy clubs of the 1980s
such as Centro Iberico, Wapping Autonomy Centre and the still extant 1 in 12
Club in Bradford. In 2008, the fledgling network was profiled in the pamphlet
'What's This Place?' which was produced as part of the academic project
Autonomous Geographies (funded by the ESRC). Occasional/Evicted Social Centres.
As well as the social centres listed above, there are some projects which are
no longer in existence. The Forest social centre and arts space in Edinburgh
did not have its lease renewed. The Basement in Manchester was forced to close
after fire damage from a nearby building. The Common Place in Leeds closed
down, but Wharf Chambers has started up in the same location. Other projects
such as Glasgow and Birmingham are actively looking for premises. Many squatted
projects have been evicted, such as the Bank of Ideas, RampART, Peckham,
Offmarket, Ratstar and the Really Free School all in London, the Free Factory
in Bristol, Pleb's College in Oxford, Cwtch Community Centre in Swansea, the
Peoples Autonomous Destination (PAD) in Cardiff, Justice not Crisis in
Birmingham, Matilda in Sheffield and the Mill Road Social Centre in Cambridge
There are some groups which choose to do temporary squatted events lasting a
fixed time. Such groups may exist for years, such as A-Spire (Leeds), Wildcats
(Brighton) or the OKasional Cafe (Manchester), which last occupied the Gamecock
pub in Hulme from February 25 to March 18, 2012.
