Ukraine without Kuchma Ukraine without Kuchma! or UbK (; "Ukrayina bez
Kuchmy!") was a mass protest campaign preceding the Orange Revolution that took
place in Ukraine in 2000–2001. Unlike the Orange Revolution the UbK was
effectively extinguished by the government enforcement units followed by
numerous arrests of the opposition and the Ukrainian-speaking participants.
Seeking the criminal responsibility for those events was renewed with the
election of Viktor Yanukovych as the President of Ukraine. "Ukraine without
Kuchma" was organized by the political opposition, influenced by the infamous
Cassette Scandal, presidential elections of 1999, and aimed mainly to demand
the resignation of the newly elected President Leonid Kuchma. The protests did
not disappear untraced and resulted in consolidation of the democratic
opposition which led to the Orange Revolution. Beginning of the protests. The
first and barely noticed action of the campaign took place on 15 December 2000
on Maydan Nezalezhnosti ("Independence Square"), the main plaza of Kiev
("Kyiv"), the Ukrainian capital. The protesters sought Kuchma's stepping down
and proper investigations of the disappearance of journalist Georgiy Gongadze.
Growth of political support. Soon, the initiative grew into a mass campaign
widely supported by students and opposition activists. The opposition parties,
having lost the 1999 Ukrainian presidential election shortly before the
scandal, considered the campaign as a natural reason for unification and
reinforcement. The protests were organized as a network coalition and guided by
collective leadership. However, Yulia Tymoshenko (at the time leading the
National Salvation Committee), Yuriy Lutsenko (at that time representing the
Socialist Party of Ukraine) and independent Volodymyr Chemerys became prominent
leaders of the action. More than a dozen political parties supported the
campaign, among them Socialists, the influential right-centrist People's
Movement of Ukraine (both represented in Ukraine's parliament, Verkhovna Rada),
extreme-right UNA-UNSO and others. The leaders put aside the political
differences between such mutually antagonistic groups and concentrated on anti-
authoritarian protest and demands for political freedom. They also united in
acceptance of broad Western support for the campaign. Mass phase of the
protests. Students and youth constituted the majority of participants, although
the campaign gained wide public support. Protesters set up a makeshift tent
encampment on the sidewalks of the plaza and neighbouring Khreschatyk Street.
Active supporters were living or taking shifts in the tents, while many others
occasionally visited the rallies. Discotheques and concerts of liberal-oriented
musicians were organized on the plaza. Student strikes took place at some
universities. Lviv and some other cities joined the campaign, but to a lesser
extent. Authorities' efforts to tackle the protests. Frightened by the scale
and unusual tactics of the campaign, the authorities repeatedly tried to
destroy the camp using police and masked provocateurs, but avoided mass
clashes. Trying to stop the protests, Kiev's mayor Oleksandr Omelchenko ordered
a major reconstruction of the plaza, fencing most of it off. This prevented the
protesters from gathering large crowds, but barely affected the campaign.
Authorities in some other cities adopted the tactic, announcing "construction
work" on their main squares, usually with no activity behind the newly-
installed fences. Controversial political impact on Cabinet. Lacking general
unity and forming a minority in the Verkhovna Rada, opposition politicians
could provide protesters with only limited support, such as initiating a mock
impeachment of Kuchma and making parliamentary protest. Pro-Western liberals
were constrained in actions since they were backing up Kuchma's Prime Minister,
highly-popular reformist Viktor Yushchenko, in his efforts to oppose pro-
President oligarchs. The campaigners called on him to support their demands and
take the lead. But Yushchenko refused, instead co-signing a highly critical
public address with together with Kuchma. Some influential media became biased
in favor of the authorities. Leonid Kuchma received three leaders of the
campaign, heard out their daring accusations and demands, but refused to
satisfy any. According to Volodymyr Chemerys, the President claimed that he
would sack the police Minister Kravchenko (accused in Gongadze's abduction), as
protesters demanded, if only Yushchenko suggested this dismissal officially as
Prime Minister - which never happened. Violent ending. Occasional mass
demonstrations were organized in front of government buildings. The organizers
claimed a strategy of non-violent resistance but failed to sustain it. On 9
March 2001, the birthday of Taras Shevchenko, there were few clashes between
protesters and riot police, and dozens were injured: arguably the most violent
and populous riots in Ukraine's modern history. Both sides of the incident
blamed the other. Protest leaders argued that police provoked the last and most
violent clash near the presidential palace, by blocking a procession and
infiltrating it with provocateurs. Indeed, militarized right-wing extremists
led the fight. In response, authorities conducted mass arrests in the city,
focussing on Ukrainian-speaking youth. Several opposition MPs took advantage of
their parliamentary immunity by storming police stations and cars in efforts to
release the apprehended. The public impression of the incident led to a gradual
decrease of support for the campaign. Soon, it was declared finished. A group
of active participants of the March 9 clashes was convicted and imprisoned.
Long-term effects. Later that year, Prime Minister Viktor Yushchenko was sacked
by President Kuchma and joined the opposition. In 2002 parliamentary election,
he led the Our Ukraine ("Nasha Ukraina") electoral coalition that won the vote,
but failed to form a majority in the Verkhovna Rada. Many UBK leaders were
united in that coalition, while others participated in the Socialist Party and
Yulia Tymoshenko Electoral Bloc(the successor of the National Salvation
Committee), which later became the political allies of Our Ukraine.
Yushchenko's campaign in the 2004 presidential election was significantly
influenced by the slogans, tactics and general spirit of UBK. The Orange
Revolution, provoked by massive electoral fraud during the vote, happened in a
manner very similar to 2001 campaign and was led mainly by the same politicians
and activists. After becoming the President, Yushchenko appointed Yuriy
Lutsenko, one of the leaders of campaign, Minister of the Internal Affairs
(i.e. the chief of the militsiya) and Yulia Tymoshenko was appointed Prime
Minister Further information. The main events and general trends of the UBK
campaign are studied in “The Face of Protest” TV documentary () made in
2003 by Andriy Schevchenko. The film is based on the various TV footages of the
protests and interviews of the participants on both sides (from campaign
leaders to militsioners).
