Underground Literary Alliance The Underground Literary Alliance is a
Philadelphia-based and internationally membered group of writers, zinesters and
DIY writers. They seek to expose what they see as the corruption and insularity
in the American book-publishing establishment while providing alternative
avenues for writers who don't easily fit into mainstream institutions and
agendas. Among many other activities, they have gained considerable attention
for their exposure of an insular literary practice whereby establishment
authors serve on juries to award monetary prizes to their writing friends. In
particular they have been able to point out cases where the prizewinning
authors are in fact already wealthy, and thus can be seen as taking money from
other authors who actually need it. In general the ULA favors direct,
vernacular writing over the more cryptic and mannered styles of the present-day
academy. They present their literary aesthetic in their communal lit-zine,
"Slush Pile". A quote from Karl Wenclas, the organization's Publicity Director:
"The Underground Literary Alliance is the most controversial writers' group in
America. We stand up for writers, expose corruption in the publishing world,
and work to create a fun & exciting alternative to the literary mainstream."
History. "We the undersigned protest the year 2000 Guggenheim grant to well-
known author Rick Moody, because it exemplifies the practice of giving
financial assistance to already successful and affluent writers, well-
connected, who clearly don’t need the help—while other writers abjectly
struggle—and because this runs counter to the implicit charitable purpose
behind the tax-exempt status of a foundation like John Simon Guggenheim." In
addition to the six who met in Hoboken, this protest was later signed by over
30 other zinesters. It was also sent out to approximately 300 of the American
lit world’s biggest-named writers, editors, and agents—but none of them
signed. Since its founding, the ULA has constantly engaged in its own brand of
“literary activism” which has gained the group a notoriety for exposing
what they see as corruption in the American literary world and for harshly
criticizing corporate-promulgated literary fiction. Current ULA members include
Patrick Simonelli, editor of litvision.org, Leopold McGinnis, author of "Game
Quest", Tom Hendricks, creator of the Zine Hall of Fame, and poet Frank Walsh.
The ULA launched its own independent press in 2006. As of December 1, 2010, the
Underground Literary Alliance appeared disbanded, with no viable webpage. Co-
founder Steve Kostecke died in April 2011. Literary activism. Guggenheim grant
protest. In late 2000, the six founders of the ULA signed a protest against the
$35,000 Guggenheim grant awarded to Rick Moody, an already-wealthy author.
Debate with George Plimpton & The Paris Review. In early 2001, the ULA held a
press conference at CBGBs in New York City which was attended by George
Plimpton, staffers at "The Paris Review", and staffers of "Open City" magazine.
The ULA debated with those who attended about what they perceive to be the
irrelevancy and lack of integrity of the current realm of corporate/academia-
sponsored literature. KGB Crash. In early 2001, the ULA crashed a literati
reading at KGB in New York City. The members present disrupted the reading with
arguments about how literature has died under the current corporate system –
and were then thrown out of the venue. Firecracker Awards. Late 2001, the ULA
protested against "McSweeney's Quarterly Concern" being awarded Best Zine of
the Year by the Firecracker Alternative Books Award because McSweeney’s does
not fit their definition of zine. Perceived Cronyism in the Lit World. The ULA
protested the 2002 National Endowment for the Arts (NEA) award of $20,000 to
Jonathan Franzen, an already-wealthy author and highly-publicized best-selling
author of "The Corrections". Rick Moody was on the NEA panel, and the ULA
contested that this was an example of the literati insularly awarding each
other. Housing Works. In early 2003, members of the ULA were kicked out of a
reading at Housing Works in New York City for heckling readers. They stated
that they were confronting the writers about what they saw as a lack of social
or political relevancy to the stories being read that night. Amazon.com & the
New York Times Article. In early 2004, a glitch at Amazon.com revealed that
Dave Eggers (of McSweeney’s and "The Believer" magazine) had posted an
anonymous response to reviews he believed were posted by ULA members (as
reported by the New York Times). David Eggers suggested that a series of
negative reviews at amazon.com were the result of ULA members retaliating
against an article about them in "The Believer". As a policy, the ULA does
nothing anonymously, and says the negative reviews were not posted by members
of the ULA. Howl Protest & the Associated Press Podcast. In April 2006, the ULA
protested against the reading of Allen Ginsberg’s "Howl" at Miller Theater at
Columbia University, which was hosted by elite literati and had no
representation of the "underground", from which the Beat Generation had sprung.
The AP covered the protest and reported on it by means of a podcast. Peter
Matthiessen and the CIA Connection. In January, 2007, the New York Times
reported that Peter Matthiessen had been working for the CIA at the time of the
founding of the Paris Review, and that for two years he used the magazine as
his cover. This article publicized the fact first revealed by Matthiessen
himself to author Frances Stonor Saunders in her 1999 book "The Cultural Cold
War." The ULA also reported the connection between the CIA and Matthiessen, in
May, 2005, in an article by Richard Cummings, who has described himself as "a
member of the Association of Former Intelligence Officers, having served on the
Board of the AFIO-New England chapter." The ULA article also went on to allege
that The Paris Review exercised covert influence over the London Review of
Books.
