Black market A black market or underground economy is a market in goods or
services which operates outside the formal one(s) supported by established
state power. Typically the totality of such activity is referred to with the
definite article as a complement to the official economies, by market for such
goods and services, e.g. "the black market in bush meat" or the state
jurisdiction "the black market in China". It is distinct from the grey market,
in which commodities are distributed through channels which, while legal, are
unofficial, unauthorized, or unintended by the original manufacturer, and the
white market, the legal market for goods and services. Worldwide, the
underground economy is estimated to have provided 1.8 billion jobs. Background.
The literature on the black market has avoided a common usage and has instead
offered a plethora of appellations including: subterranean; hidden; grey;
shadow; informal; clandestine; illegal; unobserved; unreported; unrecorded;
second; parallel and black. This profusion of vague labels attests to the
confusion of a literature attempting to explore a largely uncharted area of
economic activity. The "illegal economy" consists of the income produced by
those economic activities pursued in violation of legal statutes defining the
scope of legitimate forms of commerce. Illegal economy participants engage in
the production and distribution of prohibited goods and services, such as drug
trafficking, arms trafficking, and prostitution. The "unreported economy"
consists of those economic activities that circumvent or evade the
institutionally established fiscal rules as codified in the tax code. A summary
measure of the unreported economy is the amount of income that should be
reported to the tax authority but is not so reported. A complementary measure
of the unreported economy is the "tax gap", namely the difference between the
amount of tax revenues due the fiscal authority and the amount of tax revenue
actually collected. In the U.S. unreported income is estimated to be $2
trillion resulting in a "tax gap" of $450–$500 billion. The "unrecorded
economy" consists of those economic activities that circumvent the
institutional rules that define the reporting requirements of government
statistical agencies. A summary measure of the unrecorded economy is the amount
of unrecorded income, namely the amount of income that should (under existing
rules and conventions) be recorded in national accounting systems (e.g.
National Income and Product Accounts) but is not. Unrecorded income is a
particular problem in transition countries that switched from a socialist
accounting system to UN standard national accounting. New methods have been
proposed for estimating the size of the unrecorded (non-observed) economy. But
there is still little consensus concerning the size of the unreported economies
of transition countries. The "informal economy" comprises those economic
activities that circumvent the costs and are excluded from the benefits and
rights incorporated in the laws and administrative rules covering property
relationships, commercial licensing, labor contracts, torts, financial credit
and social security systems. A summary measure of the informal economy is the
income generated by economic agents that operate informally. The informal
sector is defined as the part of an economy that is not taxed, monitored by any
form of government, or included in any gross national product (GNP), unlike the
formal economy. In developed countries the informal sector is characterized by
unreported employment. This is hidden from the state for tax, social security
or labour law purposes but is legal in all other aspects. On the other hand,
the term "black market" can be used in reference to a specific part of the
economy in which contraband is traded. Pricing. Black markets can form part of
border trade near the borders of neighboring jurisdictions with little or no
border control if there are substantially different tax rates, or where goods
are legal on one side of the border but not on the other. Products that are
commonly smuggled like this include alcohol and tobacco. However, not all
border trade is illegal. Traded goods and services. Transportation providers.
Where taxicabs, buses, and other transportation providers are strictly
regulated or monopolized by government, a black market typically flourishes to
provide transportation to poorly served or overpriced communities. In the
United States, some cities restrict entry to the taxicab market with a
medallion system— that is, taxicabs must get a special license and display it
on a medallion in the vehicle. This has led to a market in Carpooling/illegal
taxicab operation, although in most jurisdictions it is not illegal to sell the
medallions. In Baltimore, Maryland, for example, it is not uncommon for private
individuals to provide illegal taxicab service for city residents. Illegal
drugs. From the late 19th and early 20th centuries, many countries began to ban
the keeping or using of some recreational drugs, such as the United States' war
on drugs. Many people nonetheless continue to use illegal drugs, and a black
market exists to supply them. Despite law enforcement efforts to intercept
them, demand remains high, providing a large profit motive for organized
criminal groups to keep drugs supplied. The United Nations has reported that
the retail market value of illegal drugs is $321.6 billion USD. Although law
enforcement agencies intercept a fraction of the illegal drugs, and incarcerate
hundreds of thousand of wholesale and retail sellers, the very stable demand
for such drugs and the high profit margins encourages new distributors to enter
the market without an increase in the retail price. Many drug legalization
activists draw parallels between the illegal drug trade and the Prohibition of
alcohol in the United States in the 1920s. In the United Kingdom, it is not
illegal to take drugs, but it is illegal to possess them. This can lead to the
unintended consequence that those in possession may swallow the evidence; once
in the body they are committing no crime. Prostitution. Prostitution is illegal
or highly regulated in most countries across the world. These places form a
classic study of the underground economy, because of consistent high demand
from customers, relatively high pay, but labor intensive and low skilled work,
which attracts a continual supply of workers. While prostitution exists in
every country, studies show that it tends to flourish more in poorer countries,
and in areas with large numbers of unattached men, such as around military
bases. Prostitutes in the black market generally operate with some degree of
secrecy, sometimes negotiating prices and activities through codewords and
subtle gestures. In countries such as the Netherlands, where prostitution is
legal but regulated, illegal prostitutes exist whose services are offered
cheaper without regard for the legal requirements or procedures— health
checks, standards of accommodation, and so on. In other countries such as
Nicaragua where legal prostitution is regulated, hotels may require both
parties to identify themselves, to prevent the rise of child prostitution.
Weaponry. The legislatures of many countries forbid or restrict the personal
ownership of weapons. These restrictions can range from small knives to
firearms, either altogether or by classification (e.g. caliber, automation,
etc.), and explosives. The black market supplies the demands for weaponry that
can not be obtained legally, or may only be obtained legally after obtaining
permits and paying fees. This may be by smuggling the arms from countries where
they were bought legally or stolen, or by stealing from arms manufacturers
within the country itself, using insiders. In cases where the underground
economy is unable to smuggle firearms, they can also satisfy requests by
gunsmithing their own firearms. Those who may buy this way include criminals to
use for illegal activities, gun collectors, and otherwise law abiding citizens
interested in protecting their dwellings, families or businesses. In England
and Wales, certain categories of weapons used for hunting may be owned by
qualified residents but must be registered with the local police force and kept
within a locked cabinet. Another segment of the population who may purchase
weapons on the black market are individuals who are unable to pass the legal
requirements for registration — convicted felons or those suffering from
mental illness for example. In some jurisdictions, collectors may legally keep
antique weapons made incapable of being readily restored to a firing condition.
Alcohol and tobacco. It has been reported that smuggling one truckload of
cigarettes from a low-tax US state to a high-tax state can lead to a profit of
up to $2 million. The low-tax states are generally the major tobacco producers,
and have come under enormous criticism for their reluctance to increase taxes.
North Carolina eventually agreed to raise its taxes from 5 cents to 35 cents
per pack of 20 cigarettes, although this remains far below the national
average. But South Carolina has so far refused to follow suit and raise taxes
from seven cents per pack (the lowest in the USA). In the UK it has been
reported that "27% of cigarettes and 68% of roll your own tobacco purchased on
the black market". Booze cruise. In the UK, the "booze cruise" — a day-trip
ferry to continental Europe simply to get alcohol and tobacco at lower tax
rates— is still very popular. Its popularity varies on the Euro to Sterling
exchange rate, and the relative tax rates between the different countries. Some
people do not even bother to get off the boat; they buy their stock on board
and sail straight back. Ferry companies offer extremely low fares, in the
expectation that they will make the money up in sales on the boat. The same
system exists for boats between Liverpool and Dublin, Ireland. Providing the
goods are for personal consumption, "booze cruises" are entirely legal. Because
there are no customs restrictions between European Union countries it is not
strictly a black market, but closer to a grey market. The UK and Ireland are
both European Union members and are both in a Common Travel Area so there are
neither customs nor migration restrictions for citizens of the two countries.
There is however a thriving black market in goods, rubbing tobacco in
particular, which have avoided the payment of excise duty. This is partly
supplied by "booze cruises". Copyrighted media. Street vendors in countries
where there is scant enforcement of copyright law, particularly in Asia and
Latin America, often sell deeply discounted copies of films, music CDs, and
computer software such as video games, sometimes even before the official
release of the title. A determined counterfeiter with a few hundred dollars can
make copies that are digitally identical to an original and suffer no loss in
quality; innovations in consumer DVD and CD writers and the widespread
availability of cracks on the Internet for most forms of copy protection
technology make this cheap and easy to do. This has proved very difficult for
copyright holders to combat through the law courts, because the operations are
distributed and widespread. Since digital information can be duplicated
repeatedly with no loss of quality, and distributed electronically at little to
no cost, the effective underground market value of media is zero,
differentiating it from nearly all other forms of underground economic
activity. The issue is compounded by widespread indifference to enforcing
copyright law, both with governments and the public at large. To steal a car is
seen as a crime in most people's eyes, but to obtain illicit copies of music or
a game is not. Yet, the preceding comparison, although common, is not truly
analogous. Automobile theft results in an item being removed from the owner
with the ownership transferred to a second party. Media piracy is a crime of
duplication, with no physical property being stolen. Copyright infringement law
goes as far as to deem illegal "mix-tapes" and other such material copied to
tape or disk. Copyright holders typically attest the act of theft to be in the
profits forgone to the pirates. However, this makes the unsubstantiated
assumption that the pirates would have bought the copyrighted material if it
had not been available through file sharing or other means. Many artists and
film producers have accepted the role of piracy in media distribution. The
spread of material through file sharing is a major source of publicity for
artists and has been shown to build fan bases that may be more inclined to see
the performer live (live performances make up the bulk of successful artists'
revenues). Organised crime. Usually hidden under a front business that is
legal. Currency. A government may officially set the rate of exchange of its
currency with that of other currencies, typically the US dollar. When it does,
the peg often overvalues the local currency relative to what its market value
would be if it were a floating currency. Those in possession of the "harder"
currency, for example expatriate workers, may be able to use the black market
to buy the local currency at better exchange rates than they can get
officially. In situations of financial instability and inflation, citizens may
substitute a foreign currency for the local currency. The U.S. dollar is viewed
as a relatively stable and safe currency and is often used abroad as a second
currency. At the present time, $340 billion dollars, roughly 37 percent of all
U.S. currency is believed to be circulating abroad. The widespread substitution
of U.S. currency for local currency is known as "defacto dollarization", and
has been observed in transition countries such as Cambodia and in some Latin
American countries. Some countries, such as Ecuador, abandoned their local
currency and now use US dollars, essentially for this reason, a process known
as de jure dollarization. See also the example of the Ghanaian cedi from the
1970s and 1980s. If foreign currency is difficult or illegal for local citizens
to acquire, they will pay a premium to acquire it. U.S. currency is viewed as a
relatively stable store of value and since it does not leave a paper trail, it
is also a convenient medium of exchange for both illegal transactions and for
unreported income (tax evasion) both in the U.S and abroad. Fuel. In the EU it
is not illegal for a person or business to buy fuel in one EU state for their
own use in another, but as with other goods the tax will generally be payable
by the final customer at the physical place of making the purchase. Petrol
tanks for cooking/water heating are often smuggled from Ecuador into Colombia.
The price is in Ecuador for one tank is 2.50, whereas the same tank in Colombia
costs 10 dollars. Between the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland there
has often been a black market in petrol and diesel. The direction of smuggling
can change depending on the variation of the taxes and the exchange rate
between the Euro and Pound Sterling; indeed sometimes diesel will be smuggled
in one direction and petrol the other. In some countries diesel fuel for
agricultural vehicles or domestic use is taxed at a much lower rate than that
for other vehicles. This is known as dyed fuel, because a coloured dye is added
so it can be detected if used in other vehicles (e.g. a red dye in the UK, a
green dye in Ireland). Nevertheless, the saving is attractive enough to make a
black market in agricultural diesel. In 2007 it was estimated that £350
million was not gained in potential revenue this way in the UK. Appearance and
disappearance. If an economic good is illegal but not seen by many in society
as particularly harmful, such as alcohol under prohibition in the United
States, the black market prospers. Black marketeers can reinvest profits in
diverse legal or illegal activities, well beyond the original source of profit.
Modern examples. Wars. Black markets flourish in most countries during wartime.
States that are engaged in total war or other large-scale, extended wars must
necessarily impose restrictions on home use of critical resources that are
needed for the war effort, such as food, gasoline, rubber, metal, etc.,
typically through rationing. In most cases, a black market develops to supply
rationed goods at exorbitant prices. The rationing and price controls enforced
in many countries during World War II encouraged widespread black market
activity. One source of black-market meat under wartime rationing was by
farmers declaring fewer domestic animal births to the Ministry of Food than
actually happened. Another in Britain was supplies from the USA, intended only
for use in USA army bases on British land, but leaked into the local native
British black market. During the Vietnam war, soldiers would spend Military
Payment Certificates on maid service and sexual entertainment, thus supporting
their partners and their families. If the Vietnamese civilian wanted something
that was hard to get, he would buy it at double the price from one of the
soldiers, who had a monthly ration card and thus had access to the military
stores. The transactions ran through the on-base maids to the local populace.
Although these activities were illegal, only flagrant or large-scale black-
marketeers were prosecuted by the military. Indian black-money. The black money
market situation in India is epidemic. India currently tops the list for
illegal monies in the entire world, estimated to be almost US$1,456 billion
stored in Swiss banks in the form of unaccounted money. According to the data
provided by the Swiss Banking Association, India has more black money than the
rest of the world combined. Indian Swiss bank account assets are worth 13 times
(1300%) the country’s national debt, and, if this black money is seized and
brought back to the country, India has the potential to become one of the
richest countries in the world. Allegations of Indians holding trillions in
black money in Switzerland are, however, in dispute. Later reports, including
those by Swiss Bankers Association and the Government of Switzerland, claim
that these allegations are false and fabricated, and the total amount held in
all Swiss banks by citizens of India is about 2 billion. Prohibition. A classic
example of creating a black market is the Prohibition of alcohol. In the United
States many organized crime syndicates took advantage of the lucrative
opportunities in the resulting black market in banned alcohol production and
sale. Most people did not think drinking alcohol was particularly harmful nor
that its buyers and sellers should be treated like common criminals. This led
to the illegal speakeasies, and organizations such as the Mafia grew
tremendously more powerful through their black market activities distributing
alcohol. This lasted until repeal of Prohibition.
