Uneconomic growth Uneconomic growth, in human development theory, welfare
economics (the economics of social welfare), and some forms of ecological
economics, is economic growth that reflects or creates a decline in the quality
of life. The concept is attributed to the economist Herman Daly, though other
theorists can also be credited for the incipient idea. Note that economic
degrowth is different from uneconomic growth (or uneconomic degrowth), it is
meant as a reduction of the size of the economy that would bring well-being and
sustainability. The cost, or decline in well-being, associated with extended
economic growth is argued to arise as a result of "the social and environmental
sacrifices made necessary by that growing encroachment on the eco-system." In
other words, "neconomic growth occurs when increases in production come at an
expense in resources and well-being that is worth more than the items made."
Good vs. bad growth. Uneconomic growth often reflects poorly developed or
poorly planned growth, rather than growth that is inherently bad. For example,
if one assumes that Atlantic hurricanes and Pacific typhoons have intensified
in recent years due to human-caused global warming, then a rapid surge in
automobile ownership in China, Brazil, and India could be seen as uneconomic
growth. This is based on the assumption that significantly increasing the
number of internal combustion engines worldwide would increase global warming,
and that the economic damage from global warming would more than offset any
economic growth brought about from the increase in automobiles; however, if the
new automobiles were ethanol-fuelled or battery powered from non-greenhouse-
gas-producing energy sources such as solar, wind, or nuclear instead of
petroleum-fuelled, the effect on global warming might be very minor and not
uneconomic at all. Note that the hypothetical surge in automobiles might be
'uneconomic growth' from a global perspective, but 'good economic growth' from
those countries' perspective (an example of an externality). The limits to
growth. The "limits to growth" debate has some roots in Malthusianism. Much of
the debate in recent times was prompted by the 1972 Club of Rome study "Limits
to Growth", which considers the ecological impact of growth and wealth
creation. Many of the activities required for economic growth use non-renewable
resources. Many researchers feel these sustained environmental effects can have
an effect on the whole ecosystem. They argue that the accumulated effects on
the ecosystem put a theoretical limit on growth. Some draw on archaeology to
cite examples of cultures they say have disappeared because they grew beyond
the ability of their ecosystems to support them. The argument is that the
limits to growth will eventually make growth in resource consumption
impossible. Others are more optimistic and believe that, although localized
environmental effects may occur, large-scale ecological effects are minor. The
optimists suggest that if these global-scale ecological effects exist, human
ingenuity will find ways of adapting to them. The rate or type of economic
growth may have important consequences for the environment (the climate and
natural capital of ecologies). Concerns about possible negative effects of
growth on the environment and society led some to advocate lower levels of
growth, from which comes the idea of uneconomic growth, and Green parties which
argue that economies are part of a global society and a global ecology and
cannot outstrip their natural growth without damaging them. Canadian scientist
David Suzuki argued in the 1990s that ecologies can only sustain typically
about 1.5–3% new growth per year, and thus any requirement for greater
returns from agriculture or forestry will necessarily cannibalize the natural
capital of soil or forest. Some think this argument can be applied even to more
developed economies. The role of technology, and Jevon's paradox. Mainstream
economists would argue that economies are driven by new technology—for
instance, we have faster computers today than a year ago, but not necessarily
physically more computers. Growth that relies entirely on exploiting increased
knowledge rather than exploiting increased resource consumption may thus not
qualify as uneconomic growth. In some cases, this may be true where technology
enables lower amounts of input to be used in producing the same unit of product
(and/or it reduces the amount or hazardousness of the waste generated per unit
product produced) (e.g., the increased availability of movies through the
Internet or cable television electronically may reduce the demand for physical
video tapes or DVDs for films). Nonetheless, it is crucial to also recognise
that innovation- or knowledge-driven growth still may not entirely resolve the
problem of scale, or increasing resource consumption. For instance, there might
likely be more computers due to greater demand and replacements for slower
computers. The Jevons Paradox is the proposition that technological progress
that increases the efficiency with which a resource is used, tends to increase
(rather than decrease) the rate of consumption of that resource. For example,
given that expenditure on necessities and taxes remain the same, (i) the
availability of energy-saving lightbulbs may mean lower electricity usage and
fees for a household but this frees up more discretionary, disposable income
for additional consumption elsewhere (an example of the "rebound effect") and
(ii) technology (or globalisation) that leads to the availability of cheaper
goods for consumers also frees up discretionary income for increased
consumptive spending.
