United We Stand America United We Stand America was the name selected by Texas
businessman H. Ross Perot for his citizen action organization after his 1992
independent political campaign for President of the United States. Perot's 19%
showing in the 1992 election was sufficient to entitle him to federal matching
funds for the 1996 campaign. After the campaign, Perot announced, on January
11, 1993, the formation of a non-profit watchdog organization named United We
Stand America. History. In the early 1990s, many people were talking about
forming a new political party. These discussions centered around populist
themes. The eventual result of the movement that followed was "United We Stand
America", followed by the Reform Party. The early history of UWSA revolved
around establishment of chapters in all 50 states and citizen activism against
the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). The first state granted a
charter by the national leadership of UWSA, Virginia, was chartered in June
1993. In November 1993 Ross Perot and vice-president Al Gore conducted a
nationally televised debate about NAFTA on CNN which is still the most widely
viewed political program in US history. UWSA remained active under Perot's
leadership until late 1995 when the paid staff was moved to a new organization
dubbed "Citizens for the Reform Party" which actively campaigned to petition
the Reform Party on to the ballot in all 50 states for the 1996 presidential
election. The name of Perot's organization conflicted with that of a United
Way-type LGBT group, which had copyrighted the name 'United We Stand'. Founding
of the Reform Party. The Reform Party, founded in 1995 with ballot access in
all 50 states, nominated Ross Perot for President after a convention battle
between Perot and Richard Lamm, former governor of Colorado. Perot's running
mate in 1996 was Pat Choate, a well-known author, economist and professor. The
future of the Reform Party was somewhat clouded by the 1996 election results
when the Perot/Choate ticket received only 9% of the overall vote. Since many
states require a minimum of 10% to retain ballot access, the ability of the
party to field candidates without the time and expense of petition drives was
limited. However, based on the 1996 results, the party retained the ability to
earn federal matching funds in the 2000 Presidential election - a fact that was
not lost on Pat Buchanan. The battle for control of the Reform Party between
many of the founding members and Buchanan's weakened the Reform Party to the
extent that it has diminished as a factor in U.S. politics in the years since
the 2000 election. United We Stand America exists today as a website which
appears to be re-purposed as a debt-consolidation web site. Archives of
material from the original organization can be found at http://www.uwsa.com/
books/Uwsabook.html, but the original group founded by Ross Perot ceased to be
active after the Reform Party was founded in 1995.
