Universal suffrage Universal suffrage (also universal adult suffrage, general
suffrage or common suffrage) consists of the extension of the right to vote to
adult citizens (or subjects) as a whole, though it may also mean extending said
right to minors (Demeny voting) and non-citizens. Although suffrage has two
necessary components, the right to vote and opportunities to vote, the term
universal suffrage is associated only with the right to vote and ignores the
other aspect, the frequency that an incumbent government consults the
electorate. Where universal suffrage exists, the right to vote is not
restricted by race, sex, belief, wealth or social status. Historically,
"universal suffrage" often in fact refers to "universal adult male suffrage".
The concept of universal suffrage originally referred to all male citizens
having the right to vote, regardless of property requirements or other measures
of wealth. The first system to explicitly claim to use universal suffrage was
France which is generally recognized as the first national system to abolish
all property requirements for voting. Republican France first instituted
universal male suffrage in 1792. France and Switzerland have used universal
male suffrage continuously since 1848 (for resident male citizens), longer than
any other countries. The German Empire had universal male suffrage from its
beginning in 1871. New Zealand became the first nation in the world to achieve
universal (male and female) suffrage in 1893. In most countries, full universal
suffrage – with the inclusion of women – followed universal "male" suffrage
by about ten to twenty years. Notable exceptions were France, where women could
not vote until 1945, Italy (1946), Belgium (1948) and Switzerland (1971). In
the first modern democracies, the vote was restricted to those having adequate
property and wealth, which almost always meant a minority of the male
population. In some jurisdictions, other restrictions existed, such as
restrictions on voters of a given religion. In all modern democracies the
number of people who could vote increased gradually with time. The 19th century
featured movements advocating "universal suffrage" (i.e. male) The democratic
movement of the late 19th century, unifying liberals and social democrats,
particularly in northern Europe, used the slogan "Equal and Common Suffrage".
The concept of universal suffrage does not imply any impropriety in placing
restrictions on the voting of convicted criminals or mentally ill persons. Such
restrictions exist in many countries with universal suffrage. Equally, some
universal suffrage systems apply only to resident citizens. Expanding suffrage.
The first movements toward universal suffrage occurred in the early 19th
century, and focused on removing property requirements for voting. In the late
19th and early 20th century, the focus of the universal suffrage movement
became the removal of restrictions against women having the right to vote.
Several countries which had enacted universal suffrage had their normal legal
process,or their existence, interrupted during the first world war. Many
societies in the past have denied people the right to vote on the basis of race
or ethnicity. For example, non-white people could not vote in national
elections during apartheid-era South Africa, until the system came to an end
with the first free multi-party elections in 1994. In the pre-Civil Rights Era
American South, African Americans often technically had the right to vote, but
various means prevented many of them from exercising that right.
Disenfranchisement. All US states, with the exceptions of Maine and Vermont,
disenfranchise some felons from voting depending on their current
incarceration, parole or probation status; a number US states permanently
disenfranchise some felons, even after their release from prison. Many states
within the U.S. previously disenfranchised paupers, persons who either paid no
direct taxes or those who received public assistance. There are also differing
degrees of legal recognition of non-resident citizens: non-resident Italians
have representatives at-large in the Italian parliament; U.S. citizens voting
abroad vote as residents of the last state where they (or their parents) lived;
British people, however, cannot vote for their national parliament unless they
have lived in the UK in the last fifteen years. A few nations also restrict
those who are involved in the military or police forces, as it is in the case
of Kuwait. Many democratic countries, most notably the United Kingdom and
France have had colonies, the inhabitants of which have not, or mostly not,
been citizens of the imperial power, but subjects; subjects have generally not
been entitled to vote for the imperial legislature. A peculiarly complex case
is that of Algeria under the Fourth French Republic; Algeria was legally an
integral part of France, but citizenship was restricted (as in the French
colonies proper) by culture, not by race or ethnicity. Any Algerian could
become a French citizen by choosing to live like one, but very few did as it
was considered apostasy from Islam, the dominant religion in Algeria. Citizens
of an EU Member State are allowed to vote in EU parliamentary elections, as
well as some local elections. For example, a British person living in Graz,
Austria, would be able to vote in for the European Parliament as a resident of
the "electoral district" of Austria, and to vote in Graz municipal elections.
He would, however, not be able to vote in Austrian (federal) elections, or
Styrian (state) elections. Similarly, all locally resident EU citizens in the
UK are allowed to vote for representatives of the local council, and those
resident in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland may vote for the devolved
parliaments or assemblies, but only British, Irish and Commonwealth citizens
are allowed to vote for the British House of Commons. Notable dates for
universal suffrage in the world. States have granted and revoked universal
suffrage at various times. "Note: The table can be sorted alphabetically or
chronologically using the icon." Women's suffrage. The first women's suffrage
was granted in Corsica in 1755 and lasted until 1769. Women's suffrage (with
the same property qualifications as for men) was next granted in New Jersey in
1776 (the word "inhabitants" was used instead of "men") and rescinded in 1807.
The Pitcairn Islands granted restricted women's suffrage in 1838. Various other
countries and states granted restricted women's suffrage in the later half of
the nineteenth century, starting with South Australia in 1861. The first
unrestricted women's suffrage in a major country was granted in New Zealand in
1893. The women's suffrage bill was adopted mere weeks before the general
election of 1893. Māori men had been granted suffrage in 1867, white men in
1879. The Freedom in the World index lists New Zealand as the only free country
in the world in 1893. South Australia first granted women suffrage and allowed
them to stand for parliament in 1894. In Portugal, in 1911, Carolina Beatriz
Ângelo was the first woman to be granted the right to vote. She voted in the
First Portuguese Republic elections of 1911. In 1930, Turkey granted women's
suffrage for city council elections, many years earlier than France, Italy and
Switzerland. In 1934 all women in Turkey could vote and could be elected. In
1931, the Second Spanish Republic allowed women the right of passive suffrage
with three women being elected. During the discussion to extend their right to
active suffrage, the Radical Socialist Victoria Kent confronted the Radical
Clara Campoamor. Kent argued that Spanish women were not yet prepared to vote
and, since they were too influenced by the Catholic Church they would vote for
right-wing candidates. Campoamor however pleaded for women's rights regardless
of political orientation. Her point finally prevailed and, in the election of
1933, the political right won with the vote of citizens of any sex over 23.
Both Campoamor and Kent lost their seats. Youth suffrage, children's suffrage
and suffrage in school. Democratic schools practice and support universal
suffrage in school, which allows a vote to every member of the school,
including students and staff. Such schools hold that this feature is essential
for students to be ready to move into society at large.
