University Revolution The University Revolution () or Argentine university
reform of 1918 was a general modernization of the universities, especially
tending towards democratization, brought about by student activism during the
presidency of Hipolito Yrigoyen. The events started in Córdoba and spread to
the rest of Argentina, and then through much of Latin America. The revolution
set up the freedom for universities to define its own curriculum and manage its
own budget without interference from the central government. This has had a
profound effect on academic life at the universities through the
nationalization process that boasts academic freedom and independence
throughout the university life. Background. Ever since the Jesuits founded the
first university in Argentina in the 17th century, education was managed by the
clergy and conservative upper-class citizens. The universities' authorities
were selected by them, and professors were appointed for life. Professors also
decided on the subjects to be taught, usually following the preferences of the
Church and suppressed modern ideas such as Darwin's theory of evolution. By the
end of the 19th century many changes were taking place in Argentina. With the
arrival of European immigrants in large waves, new ideas arrived with them
which were opposed to the old oligarchic conservatism. The 1912 Sáenz Peña
Law of the secret vote brought the less conservative Hipólito Yrigoyen to the
presidency in 1916. It was in 1918 that the students of the National University
of Córdoba, probably the most conservative in Argentina at that time, demanded
a revision of the university's statutes to modernize and democratize them. They
succeeded in creating student centres, but their demands were ignored.
Conflict. The conflict started with a lateral problem, the cancellation of the
patients beds at the "Hospital de Clínicas" university hospital in late 1917.
On March 31, 1918, when classes should have been restarted, the students
organised another strike, with demonstrations, that finally forced the national
government to intervene the university. José Matienzo was named intervenor of
the university, and he confirmed most of the irregularities described by the
students. He declared vacant the positions of Rector of the university and
Deans of the faculties, and commanded the democratisation of the university's
statutes. But the students were not to be part of this process, since the
conservative Antonio Nores was voted Rector of the University, against the
wishes of the students. The students occupied the faculties' premises, so
classes could not be restarted regularly. They resisted the police and were
finally driven out by force by the national army. This produced a general
uneasiness of the public throughout the country, which forced President
Yrigoyen to appoint his Minister of Justice and Public Education, José S.
Salinas, as a new intervenor of the university. The decree of the university
reform was redacted on October 12, 1918. Repercussions. The objectives of the
1918 Cordoba Reform were promptly adopted by many student organizations, and
one by one, from Argentina to Mexico, Latin American universities experienced
unprecedented uprisings. The same year the reform statutes were enacted into
law at Córdoba, they were extended to the University of Buenos Aires and later
to other Argentinean universities. Its principles were included in the 1920
manifesto of the Argentine University Federation, and subsequently endorsed by
the International Student Congress on University Reform held in Mexico City in
1921, with the participation of delegates from Latin America, United States,
Europe, and Asia. In 1924, when Haya de la Torre, leader of the university
reform in Peru, founded the Popular Revolutionary American Alliance, the
original student demands evolved into a vigorous and ambitious political,
social, and economic movement. The Cordoba Reform had a tremendous impact in
most Latin American universities, and would even inspire the leaders of the
1960s student movement in industrialized countries. The success of the
students' demands in Córdoba soon spread to other important universities such
as the University of Buenos Aires, the National University of La Plata, the
National University of Tucumán and the National University of Rosario, from
which it extended to other Latin American countries: first to Peru, then Chile
and Cuba, Colombia, Guatemala and Uruguay. In the 1930s, a second Latin
American wave of university reforms shook Brazil, Paraguay, Bolivia, Ecuador,
Venezuela and Mexico. The repercussion went further even eliciting the autonomy
of the Royal and Pontifical University of Mexico granted in the 1920s into the
National Autonomous University of Mexico that exist up to day. Likewise
México, but in 1921, the Peruvian Royal and Pontifical University of San
Marcos granted the autonomy of the nowadays National University of San Marcos
the oldest university in the Americas. Since University Reform, student
organisations have maintained close links with workers' organizations and labor
unions, frequently joining them in demonstrations and protests. Another
consequence has been the politicizing of the student centers for the elections
inside the universities, with which they are usually connected, identified
with, and supported by national political parties.
