University of Puget Sound The University of Puget Sound (Puget Sound or UPS) is
a private liberal arts college located in the North End of Tacoma, Washington,
in the United States. It is the only nationally ranked independent
undergraduate liberal arts college in Western Washington, and one of only
seventeen west of the Mississippi River. It offers Bachelor of Arts, Bachelor
of Science, Bachelor of Music, Master of Arts in Teaching, Master of Education,
Master of Occupational Therapy, and Doctor of Physical Therapy degrees. As of
2010, it has an undergraduate enrollment of 2,632 and a graduate enrollment of
209. The school draws students from 48 states and 20 countries. It offers 1,200
courses each year in more than 50 major fields. In the 1970s the university was
widely known for its freewheeling social life, but throughout the 1980s and
1990s, the focus increasingly shifted to academics. Now, Puget Sound is a
nationally ranked institution enjoying top academic marks from third party
evaluators and college guides. In 2009, U.S. News & World Report ranked it 80th
in a list of the top liberal arts colleges in the United States. The university
maintains a relationship with The United Methodist Church. History. Two cities
vied for the location of the school: Port Townsend and Tacoma. The committee
eventually decided on Tacoma. A charter was drawn up and filed in Olympia on
March 17, 1888. This date marks the legal beginning of the school. At this
time, the school's legal title was "The Puget Sound University". In September
1890, UPS opened its doors, taking in 88 students. The beginnings of the school
were marked by moral conviction: students were warned against intoxicating
liquors, visits to saloons, gambling, tobacco use, and obscene drawings or
writings on the college grounds. The university also had a financially
tumultuous beginning. There was no endowment and the school often struggled for
funds to pay the professors. It moved locations three times in 13 years and, at
one time, the school was merged with Portland University (former campus is now
the University of Portland). It opened up a year later (1899) back in Tacoma on
the 9th and G Street. In 1903, the school was "reborn" and re-incorporated as a
different entity, different trustees, and a different name: the "University of
Puget Sound". The character of the school changed dramatically during the
presidency of Edward H. Todd (1913–1942), who worked tirelessly to bring
financial and academic stability. During his tenure, the "Million Dollar
Campaign" was started, raising $1,022,723 for buildings, equipment, and
endowment. With this money, the campus moved in 1924 to its current location in
the residential North End of Tacoma, with five buildings, setting a stylistic
tone for the institution. In 1914 the university was renamed the "College of
Puget Sound". President R. Franklin Thompson (1942–1973) led a massive
physical and institutional expansion: During this era almost all of the
university's buildings were constructed. In 1960, the university's name changed
from the "College of Puget Sound" back to the "University of Puget Sound", as
it is known today. Phillip M. Phibbs presided from 1973 to 1992 and endeavored
to change the tone of Puget Sound. In 1980, the university divested its
attachment with the Methodist Church, and an independent board of trustees
assumed full fiscal responsibility of the university. Also during this time,
the university began to focus on undergraduate education excellence, phasing
out all off-campus programs except the law school and most graduate programs.
During this time the library collections were broadened and the faculty greatly
expanded. With the advent of President Susan Resneck Pierce (1992–2003), the
law school was promptly sold to Seattle University, in a move that was
calculated to focus the university's resources on its undergraduate campus.
During her tenure, the University completed almost $100 million of new
construction and renovation Collins Memorial Library and four academic
buildings were renovated, and Wyatt Hall was constructed to house the growing
class and office space needs of the Humanities Department. Trimble Residence
Hall was constructed, bringing on-campus student residency to 65%. SAT scores
rose from 1067 to 1253 and the endowment more than tripled. Puget Sound's
newest President is Ronald R. Thomas, affectionately called "Ron Thom" by many
students, a scholar of Victorian literature, and the former vice-President of
Trinity College. Thompson Hall, home of the sciences at the university,
underwent a major renovation, including the construction of a new wing (Harned
Hall, completed 2006) on the building's western side against Union Avenue and
extensive renovations to the current wings and courtyard to allow for upgraded
labs and facilities. The entire project was completed in mid 2008. The entire
complex is now known locally as "The Science Center". The now completely
enclosed courtyard contains a striking Plexiglas structure where a new coffee
shop, the Oppenheimer Cafe, is located. Presidents of the university. ∗ Prof.
Charles O. Boyer (acting president, 1901–1903) Campus. The campus is located
in North Tacoma, Washington in a primarily residential setting a few minutes'
walk from downtown Proctor and the Sixth Avenue district. President Ron Thomas
recently initiated a campus "Master Plan" in order to preserve and expand the
campus aesthetically and fundamentally. The plan will increase on-campus
housing to 75% as well as allow for the construction of a number of new
buildings. The campus is made up of mainly brick buildings in the Tudor- Gothic
architectural style. Buildings are mostly arranged into quads. The three main
quads are the North Quad and South Quad, which contain residence halls, and
Karlen Quad, which contains Jones Hall, Collins Memorial Library and the Music
Building. The library was designed by Tacoma architect Silas E. Nelsen in 1954.
It was later renovated. President Thomas recently wrote a piece explaining his
opinion that new buildings should maintain the gothic style that the university
is known for. Academic buildings. Harned Hall, named for alumnus and local real
estate developer H.C. "Joe" Harned, was dedicated on September 29, 2006. The
building is and cost $25 million to construct. It was designed and built to
meet the US Green Building Council's LEED Silver Standard. The building
features labs for biology, geology, chemistry, environmental science, and
physics, a courtyard with a crystalline glass gazebo in the center, a Foucault
pendulum designed by Alan Thorndike, as well as Gray whale skeleton named
Willy. After Harned Hall was completed, the university began a $38 million
renovation of Thompson Hall, the "old" science building. Harned and Thompson
Halls form a square with a courtyard in the middle that are collectively named
the Science Center. Thompson Hall has an area of and was originally constructed
in 1968. The renovation was completed in spring 2008. Wyatt Hall is the second
newest academic building on campus, dedicated in 2003. It houses the English,
History, Foreign Languages & Literature, Politics & Government, Philosophy,
Honors, Science Technology & Society, Classics, and Religion departments. Many
of the classrooms in the building are seminar style, meaning a circle of tables
that students sit at to encourage discussion between students and the
professor, rather than a lecture. The building features glass art by Dale
Chihuly that represents the ivy leaves covering the campus buildings. The
Wheelock Student Center, known as the "SUB" (Student Union Building) is the
main hub of life on campus. It features a rotunda used for lectures and catered
events, KUPS (the campus radio station), the cafeteria and dining area,
Diversions Cafe (a student-run coffee shop), and The Cellar (a student-run
pizza parlor). Other buildings include McIntyre Hall, home of the School of
Business and Leadership, the departments of Economics, Comparative Sociology
and International Political Economy, Howarth Hall, home of the psychology and
education departments, Jones Hall, home of theatre arts, communications and
several administrative offices including the Office of the President and the
Music Building (which is the only building on campus without a name). Kittredge
Hall, the original student union building, now houses the art department and
Kittredge Art Gallery. The Gallery is now affiliated with the Tacoma Art
Museum. Collins Memorial Library houses over 400,000 books and over 130,000
periodicals, is a partial federal government repository, and has substantial
microform holdings. The Library was named after former trustee Everill S.
Collins. The current Library building was built in 1954. A larger addition was
completed in 1974. In 2000, a major renovation brought new technology and media
resources into the Library's spaces, making it one of the most popular campus
gathering places for students. Construction for the Center for Health Sciences
began in spring 2010. At , the center will provide the resources and
flexibility needed to support new areas of study in the fields of health and
behavioral sciences. Designed by Bohlin Cywinski Jackson/Seattle, the center
will conform to the U.S. Green Building Council's Leadership in Energy and
Environmental Design (LEED) Silver standards. Residential buildings. , Schiff,
Anderson/Langdon, Smith, and University halls make up what is called the "North
Quad", and Todd/Phibbs, Regester, Seward, and Trimble make up the "South Quad".
Theme Row, which runs to the south end of campus, contains around 20 different
theme houses that students may apply to live in. The Music House is the longest
standing house, originating in 1989. After the Music House, the Outhaus and the
Track and Cross Country Theme House are the two longest standing houses. There
are also about 60 non-theme university-owned houses available. Currently around
65% of students live on campus. First year students are not required to live on
campus, although 98% do, on average. In 2009, the university upgraded
residential Internet bandwidth by more than two-fold, to 100 Mbit/s. During
that year, a new connection to the Washington State K-20 Educational Network
was also installed, bringing the university's aggregate bandwidth to 150 Mbit/
s. Further bandwidth upgrades have brought student bandwidth to 250 Mbit/s for
the 2012-13 academic year. Academics. Profile. The university offers more than
40 major programs in the liberal arts and sciences, as well as graduate
programs in occupational therapy, physical therapy, and education. The student
to faculty ratio is 11 to 1. The University is consistently ranked among the
top five small liberal arts colleges for the number of graduates who
participate in Peace Corps; in 2007, it ranked first. University of Puget Sound
was ranked one of The Advocate's "Top 20 College Campuses for Lesbian, Gay,
Bisexual, and Transsexual students", getting 19 out of a possible 20 points.
The demographics of the surrounding area are 76% White, 7% Black, 6% Hispanic,
6% Asian, and 1% Native American. International programs. The university
sponsors study abroad programs in Argentina, Australia, Austria, Chile, China,
Costa Rica, England, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Japan, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, the Pacific Rim, Scotland, Spain, Taiwan, and Wales.
The program in the Pacific Rim, known as PacRim, or the Pacific Rim/Asia Study-
Travel Program (PRAST) is unique to UPS. Every three years a group of 15-25
students are selected to spend two semesters traveling, studying, and
researching in eight Asian countries. Students must have taken three courses in
the Asian Studies program and completed a course of readings assigned by the
director. Over the program's thirty year history students have visited:
Mongolia, People's Republic of China, Japan, South Korea, India, Nepal,
Vietnam, Thailand, Cambodia, Malaysia, Sri Lanka, Indonesia, Papua New Guinea,
Fiji, Australia, New Zealand, Iran, and Yugoslavia. Previous lecturers have
included: Johan Galtung, Ken Yeang, Dr. M.S. Nagaraja Rao, Jack Weatherford,
His Holiness the 14th Dalai Lama, His Holiness Swasti Sri Charukeerthi
Bhattaraka, Ogyen Trinley Dorje, Khyongla Rato Rinpoche, and Sogyal Rinpoche.
The number of students at UPS who study abroad has increased from 17% to 40%
from 1998 to 2008. Tuition and finances. For 2009-2010, the cost of attendance
(tuition, room, board, and fees) is $44,900, which is consistent with other
liberal arts colleges of its caliber. All of the above scholarships require no
additional applications and are renewable provided a student maintains
satisfactory academic progress. Additional scholarships are available through
separate applications or by audition. Puget Sound offers scholarships for
music, forensics (speech and debate), art, and other talents. Scholarships
based on academic interest—such as the sciences, humanities, and Asian
Studies—are offered as well. Athletics. The Puget Sound athletics teams are
known as the "Loggers" with a grizzly bear, "Grizz", as their mascot.
Originally only "Loggers" was used, until debate arose over the appropriateness
of having a male logger be the mascot at a school which supports equal rights
for men and women. The school is now trying to shift mascot recognition over to
"Grizz", who is viewed as more in line with the University's focus. They
participate in the NCAA's Division III Northwest Conference, competing with
George Fox University, Lewis and Clark College, Linfield College, Pacific
University, Pacific Lutheran University, Whitman College, Whitworth University,
and Willamette University. Varsity sports. The University offers 21 different
varsity sports teams: Men's Baseball, Men's and Women's Basketball, Men's and
Women's Crew, Men's and Women's Cross Country, Men's Football, Men's and
Women's Golf, Women's Lacrosse, Men's and Women's Soccer, Women's Softball,
Men's and Women's Swimming, Men's and Women's Tennis, Men's and Women's Track &
Field, and Women's Volleyball. On a minor note, former national soccer team
coach Bruce Arena got his coaching start at Puget Sound in 1976 as head of the
men's soccer team. Club sports. There are both men's and women's club soccer
teams, as well as men's club lacrosse (which, due to Title IX restrictions,
competes in the Pacific Northwest Collegiate Lacrosse League). The University
also has a men's club Ultimate team known as the "Postmen [http://
sites.google.com/a/upsultimate.com/www/]", and a women's club Ultimate team
known as "Zephyr". The UPS Loggers Hockey team which was founded in 2005 and is
currently an ACHA division II team. The team's most prominent victories include
defeating the University of Washington Huskies in a 3-game series in the 2006-
2007 season, and the Gonzaga Bulldogs in the 2007-2008 season. Loggers hockey
is subsidized by ASUPS (the Associated Students of UPS) student body and ticket
sales for home games. Home games are currently played at the Sprinker Ice Area
in south Tacoma. Players come from the student body, and mostly consist of
students hailing from Canada, Washington, Colorado, Minnesota, and states on
the East Coast. Achievements. Several sports teams have achieved some degree of
success in recent years. The men's basketball team has won three straight
Northwest Conference championships since 2004, as well an average .826 winning
percentage over the 2004, 2005, and 2006 seasons. In 2005, the Division III
Loggers defeated the Division I Highlanders of the University of California,
Riverside, making it their first Division I defeat since the 1970s. In the 2009
regular season, the Loggers went an undefeated 16-0 in Northwest Conference
play, becoming the first team in conference history to do so, capturing the
conference title in the process. Student life. Traditions and events. Log Jam
is a campus-wide celebration that ends the first week of fall classes. Tables
are set around the perimeter of Todd Field and clubs and teams set up to
recruit potential members. Foolish Pleasures is an annual student film festival
showing films written, directed, acted, and produced by students. Midnight
breakfast is a celebration in the student union building, which occurs each
semester on the last day of classes. The Hatchet. The Hatchet is the official
symbol of sports teams at the University of Puget Sound. It was first
discovered in 1906 when students were digging up a barn at the old campus. They
decided to carve their class year into it. This became a tradition of sorts, as
the seniors would hand the hatchet to the juniors on senior recognition day.
This turned into a competition where each class would try to possess the
hatchet for as long as possible. It disappeared for 15 years until it was
anonymously mailed to former President Franklin Thompson. Thompson displayed it
in a trophy case in Jones Hall, where it mysteriously disappeared again, only
to resurface at a homecoming game in 1988. In 1998, the hatchet's return was
negotiated through an intermediary, and it was permanently displayed in a
display case in the Wheelock Student Center. It was stolen in 1999 during a
false fire alarm in one of the dormitories. On September 30, 2006 (homecoming)
a student rappelled into the football field at halftime, brandishing "the
hatchet". It was later revealed by the student newspaper "The Trail" that this
hatchet is a replica of the actual hatchet, commissioned by the former student
government administration without the knowledge of the student senate. The
replica hatchet was painstakingly carved to look exactly like the original,
using over 150 photos as a guide. The original hatchet was finally returned to
President Ronald Thomas in 2008 by two anonymous alumni and was displayed at
Homecoming. Plans for safe storage of the relic are still in the works.
Sustainability. In 2007, the Sustainability Advisory Committee initiated an
innovative campus grants program. Members of the campus community are invited
to submit proposals to the Sustainability Advisory Committee. Proposals are
ranked using criteria of feasibility and impact, and decisions for funding are
made accordingly. Recipients and project descriptions are available here. In
2007, President Thomas signed the American College and University Presidents
Climate Commitment on behalf of the university. Fraternities and sororities.
UPS is home to three fraternities and four sororities. 20% of male students and
29% of female students are involved in Greek life. Represented fraternities
include, Phi Delta Theta (1848/1952), Sigma Chi(1855/1950), and recently
reinstated Sigma Alpha Epsilon (1856/2010). Represented sororities and women's
fraternities include Pi Beta Phi (1867), Kappa Alpha Theta (1870), Alpha Phi
(1872), and Gamma Phi Beta (1874). Puget Sound has a "deferred recruitment",
which means that fraternities, sororities, and their members are not allowed to
have any official contact with freshmen outside of class, athletics or club
activities until the organized recruitment events in the first two weeks of the
spring semester. Freshmen may not join a chapter until January. In the fall,
chapters are permitted to give "snap bids" to upperclassmen, as well as
participate in an organized fall recruitment open only to upperclassmen. A
ceremony called "Crossover" takes place annually on the third weekend of spring
semester. Members of the Greek community partake in an entire day of
celebration to honor the new members as they run across the field to their
selected fraternity. Previously, several other organizations, including Sigma
Nu, Kappa Sigma, Delta Delta Delta, Kappa Kappa Gamma and Beta Theta Pi were
represented on campus, however those chapters have all closed for a variety of
reasons. Media. KUPS 90.1FM (The Sound) is a student-run, non-commercial,
educational college radio station that began in 1968. In 2002, KUPS began
streaming its standard live programming online to the world. The radio station
broadcasts 24 hours a day, 7 days a week and serves the greater Tacoma area
with programming in a variety of genres. KUPS has earned various awards while
broadcasting over the years. In 2005, KUPS was named by The Princeton Review as
one of the best college radio stations in the country (#12). In 2007, KUPS was
ranked #9 by the Princeton Review in the Top Ten Best College Radio Stations in
the Country. Most recently, in the spring of 2010, MTV honored KUPS with the
national title of Best College Radio Station at the MTVu Woodie Awards. In the
fall of 2011, KUPS was ranked third in a list of "10 great college radio
stations" in the Washington Post. "The Trail" is an independent student-run
organization that provides Puget Sound students, faculty, staff, and the local
community with a credible weekly newspaper that serves as a comprehensive
source of information, entertainment and discourse relevant to its readership.
"The Trail" provides opportunities for students interested in journalism and
acts as an archival record for the university. In addition, The Trail serves as
a link between Puget Sound and the greater Tacoma community and provides an
open forum for student opinion and discourse within the university.
"Crosscurrents" is the school's literary and arts magazine and was established
in 1957. Crosscurrents is published two times during the academic year, once
during the Fall semester and once during the Spring semester. Magazines are
free to the campus community. It is staffed by students and publishes student
artwork, photography, prose, poetry, and the occasional miscellaneous piece.
Crosscurrents also features a guest artist or writer in each issue- usually a
notable person from the pacific northwest who is interviewed about their work.
"Wetlands" is a recent student-organized magazine focusing on sexual
exploration and gender expression to encourage inclusive and open-minded
conversations across the campus community. The magazine features community-
submitted photography, poetry, and prose. "Black Ice" (or the Black Student
Union Zine) is a student magazine by the focused on issues for the betterment
of all students of color. The magazine is published by the The Black Student
Union, which was founded in 1968 making it one of the university's oldest
clubs.
