Universal health care Universal health care — sometimes referred to as
universal health coverage, universal coverage, universal care or social health
protection — usually refers to a health care system which provides health
care and financial protection to all its citizens. It is organized around
providing a specified package of benefits to all members of a society with the
end goal of providing financial risk protection, improved access to health
services, and improved health outcomes. Universal health care is not a one-
size-fits-all concept; nor does it imply coverage for all people for
everything. Universal health care can be determined by three critical
dimensions: who is covered, what services are covered, and how much of the cost
is covered. History. Germany has the world's oldest universal health care
system, with origins dating back to Otto von Bismarck's social legislation,
which included the Health Insurance Bill of 1883, Accident Insurance Bill of
1884, and Old Age and Disability Insurance Bill of 1889. In the United Kingdom,
the National Insurance Act 1911 marked the first steps there towards universal
health care, covering most employed persons and their financial dependents and
all persons who had been continuous contributors to the scheme for at least
five years whether they were working or not. This system of health insurance
continued in force until the creation of the National Health Service in 1948
which extended health care security to all legal residents. Most current
universal health care systems were implemented in the period following the
Second World War as a process of health care reform, intended to make health
care available to all, in the spirit of Article 25 of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights of 1948, signed by every country doing so. The US did not
ratify the social and economic rights sections, including Article 25's right to
health. Funding models. Universal health care in most countries has been
achieved by a mixed model of funding. General taxation revenue is the primary
source of funding, but in many countries it is supplemented by specific levies
(which may be charged to the individual and/or an employer) or with the option
of private payments (either direct or via optional insurance) for services
beyond those covered by the public system. Almost all European systems are
financed through a mix of public and private contributions. The majority of
universal health care systems are funded primarily by tax revenue (e.g.
Portugal Spain, Denmark and Sweden). Some nations, such as Germany, France and
Japan employ a multi-payer system in which health care is funded by private and
public contributions. However, much of the non-government funding is by
contributions by employers and employees to regulated non-profit sickness
funds. These contributions are compulsory and defined according to law. A
distinction is also made between municipal and national healthcare funding. For
example, one model is that the bulk of the healthcare is funded by the
municipality, speciality healthcare is provided and possibly funded by a larger
entity, such as a municipal co-operation board or the state, and the
medications are paid by a state agency. Universal health care systems are
modestly redistributive. Progressivity of health care financing has limited
implications for overall income inequality. Compulsory insurance. This is
usually enforced via legislation requiring residents to purchase insurance,
though sometimes, in effect, the government provides the insurance. Sometimes
there may be a choice of multiple public and private funds providing a standard
service (as in Germany) or sometimes just a single public fund (as in Canada).
The U.S. Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act is a law based on
compulsory insurance. In some European countries where there is private
insurance and universal health care, such as Germany, Belgium, and The
Netherlands, the problem of adverse selection (see Private insurance below) is
overcome using a risk compensation pool to equalize, as far as possible, the
risks between funds. Thus a fund with a predominantly healthy, younger
population has to pay into a compensation pool and a fund with an older and
predominantly less healthy population would receive funds from the pool. In
this way, sickness funds compete on price and there is no advantage to
eliminate people with higher risks because they are compensated for by means of
risk-adjusted capitation payments. Funds are not allowed to pick and choose
their policyholders or deny coverage, but then mainly compete on price and
service. In some countries the basic coverage level is set by the government
and cannot be modified. Ireland at one time had a "community rating" system
through VHI, effectively a single-payer or common risk pool. The government
later opened VHI to competition but without a compensation pool. This resulted
in foreign insurance companies entering the Irish market and offering cheap
health insurance to relatively healthy segments of the market which then made
higher profits at VHI's expense. The government later re-introduced community
rating through a pooling arrangement and at least one main major insurance
company, BUPA, then withdrew from the Irish market. Among the potential
solutions posited by economists are single payer systems as well as other
methods of ensuring that health insurance is universal, such as by requiring
all citizens to purchase insurance and limiting the ability of insurance
companies to deny insurance to individuals or vary price between individuals.
Tax-based financing. In tax-based financing, individuals contribute to the
provision of health services through various taxes. These are typically pooled
across the whole population, unless local governments raise and retain tax
revenues. Some countries (notably the United Kingdom, Ireland, Italy, Spain,
Portugal, Greece and the Nordic countries) choose to fund health care directly
from taxation alone. Other countries with insurance-based systems effectively
meet the cost of insuring those unable to insure themselves via social security
arrangements funded from taxation, either by directly paying their medical
bills or by paying for insurance premiums for those affected. Social Health
Insurance. In social health insurance, contributions from workers, the self-
employed, enterprises and government are pooled into a single or multiple funds
on a compulsory basis. These funds typically contract with a mix of public and
private providers for the provision of a specified benefit package. Preventive
and public health care may be provided by these funds or responsibility kept
solely by the Ministry of Health. Within social health insurance, a number of
functions may be executed by parastatal or non-governmental sickness funds or
in a few cases by private health insurance companies. Private insurance. In
private health insurance, premiums are paid directly from employers,
associations, individuals and families to insurance companies, which pool risks
across their membership base. Private insurance includes policies sold by
commercial for profit firms, non-profit companies, and community health
insurers. Generally private insurance is voluntary in contrast to social
insurance programs that tend to be compulsory. In some countries with universal
coverage, private insurance often excludes many health conditions which are
expensive and which the state health care system can provide. For example, in
the UK, one of the largest private health care providers is BUPA, which has a
long list of general exclusions even in its highest coverage policy, most of
which are routinely provided by the NHS. In the USA dialysis treatment for end
stage renal failure is generally paid for by government and not by the
insurance industry. Persons with privatized Medicare (Medicare Advantage) are
the exception and must get their dialysis paid through their insurance company,
but persons with end stage renal failure generally cannot buy Medicare
Advantage plans. The Planning Commission of India has also suggested that the
country should embrace insurance to achieve universal health coverage. As of
now general tax is used to meet the essential health requirements of all
people. Single payer. The term single-payer health care is used in the United
States to describe a funding mechanism meeting the costs of medical care from a
single fund. Although the fund holder is usually the government, some forms of
single-payer employ a public-private system. Community-based Health Insurance.
A particular form of private health insurance that has often emerged in
environments where financial risk protection mechanisms only have a limited
impact is community-based health insurance. Contributions are not risk-related,
and there is generally a high level of community involvement in the running of
such schemes. Implementation and comparisons. Universal health care systems
vary according to the extent of government involvement in providing care and/or
health insurance. In some countries, such as the UK, Spain, Italy and the
Nordic countries, the government has a high degree of involvement in the
commissioning or delivery of health care services and access is based on
residence rights not on the purchase of insurance. Others have a much more
pluralistic delivery system based on obligatory health with contributory
insurance rates related to salaries or income, and usually funded by employers
and beneficiaries jointly. Sometimes the health funds are derived from a
mixture of insurance premiums, salary related mandatory contributions by
employees and/or employers to regulated sickness funds, and by government
taxes. These insurance based systems tend to reimburse private or public
medical providers, often at heavily regulated rates, through mutual or publicly
owned medical insurers. A few countries such as the Netherlands and Switzerland
operate via privately owned but heavily regulated private insurers that are not
allowed to make a profit from the mandatory element of insurance but can profit
by selling supplemental insurance. Universal health care is a broad concept
that has been implemented in several ways. The common denominator for all such
programs is some form of government action aimed at extending access to health
care as widely as possible and setting minimum standards. Most implement
universal health care through legislation, regulation and taxation. Legislation
and regulation direct what care must be provided, to whom, and on what basis.
Usually some costs are borne by the patient at the time of consumption but the
bulk of costs come from a combination of compulsory insurance and tax revenues.
Some programs are paid for entirely out of tax revenues. In others tax revenues
are used either to fund insurance for the very poor or for those needing long
term chronic care. The UK government's National Audit Office in 2003 published
an international comparison of ten different health care systems in ten
developed countries, nine universal systems against one non-universal system
(the U.S.), and their relative costs and key health outcomes. A wider
international comparison of 16 countries, each with universal health care, was
published by the World Health Organization in 2004 In some cases, government
involvement also includes directly managing the health care system, but many
countries use mixed public-private systems to deliver universal health care.
