Up with People Up with People (UWP) is a global education organization whose
mission is to bridge cultural barriers and create global understanding through
service and music. UWP was founded on the principle of using music as a means
of communicating with and inspiring people. The musical production remains a
core component of the program, and all students play an important role in
bringing this show to the stage in each community. UWP is unique because of the
one-of-a-kind combination of international travel, cultural immersion,
education, performing arts and service learning. UWP’s educational program is
experiential in nature and supported through a series of interactive workshops
focused on leadership, communication, team-building, cultural understanding and
global issues. Professional development opportunities are available though
internships. The UWP headquarters is in Denver, Colorado, USA, with satellite
offices in Belgium and Mexico. All students spend a month in Denver preparing
for their tour. Each traveling group, called a cast, consists of approximately
100 students from around the globe, and host families provide housing. History.
Up with People was founded by J. Blanton Belk in 1965 as a positive voice for
young people during a turbulent period in the United States. Its historic path
officially began in 1968 when it was incorporated as a 501(c)(3) international,
educational non-profit entity. Over the years:. • More than 21,000 young men
and women from more than 80 countries have come together to travel in 180 casts
to deliver a common message of hope and goodwill to people around the world,
and pursue their own global education and personal growth goals through
service, music and travel. • UWP has visited more than 4,000 communities in
42 countries; • Over 3 million hours of community service have been performed
by UWP students; • 500,000 host families around the world have welcomed UWP
students into their homes, and • An estimated 22 million people worldwide
have been directly impacted by UWP. Up with People Today:. Up with People
continues to be a global education and arts organization whose goal is to
bridge cultural barriers and create global understanding through service and
music. Multi-Continent Travel, Community Service-Learning, Cultural Immersion,
Performing Arts and Experiential and workshop-based education focused on
leadership, communication, global awareness and personal development. Students
from all parts of the world travel with UWP for one or two semesters. Each
international tour embarks with nearly 100 participants ages 17 – 29 from
more than 15 countries. The UWP Semester. Each group, called a cast, travels to
nearly 20 communities across two or three continents, per semester, spending
about one week in each community. Each week, they live with a local host
family, participate in 8 – 12 hours of service-learning projects, learn about
different cultures through 4 – 6 hours of educational workshops, and perform
in Up with People’s two-hour professional musical stage production. Programs
begin in January or July of each year, and college credit is available.
Participants can apply to go abroad with UWP for one or two semesters. "Smile
'Til It Hurts: The Up with People Story". The documentary film "Smile 'Til It
Hurts: The Up with People Story" premiered at the 2009 Slamdance Film Festival.
It is an unofficial documentary history of the organization. The film was
directed by Lee Storey who is married to early alumnus William Storey. The film
documents the troupe's history from its origins in the late 1950s within Moral
Re-Armament and the Sing-Out groups, through its successful years of the 1980s
and subsequent decline. The film states that the troupe, funded by corporate
entities including Halliburton, General Motors, Exxon, and Searle, was intended
to counter the hippie subculture. The film further claims that the musical
group emphasized extreme right wing politics, and alleges that troupe rules
included aspects of a religious cult, including arranged marriages. Reviews
have noted that while a critique of the organization, the film has also shown
respect for those who were involved and demonstrated their good intentions. The
film had also been at issue in an IRS court case over whether an unprofitable
independent film is a business venture versus a hobby. Ultimately it was
determined to be a business venture. Up with People Alumni:. Up with People’s
more than 21,000+ alumni have made very real and sustainable change across the
globe. For more than four decades, students who traveled in Up with People have
gone on to become enthusiastic leaders in their communities, their countries
and the world. Equipped with the life skills and broad perspectives learned on
the road, many have become true global citizens and continue to give back in
their careers and everyday lives. Ross Anderson, skier Cecil Broadhurst,
artist, songwriter, actor and playwright John Eichelberger, politician Timothy
Gallwey, author (The Inner Game of Tennis) Frank Gatson, Jr., choreographer
(for Beyonce, Brandy, many others) Kurt Krakowian, actor Bastiaan Ragas, singer
and actor Tooske Ragas, actress and television host John T. Reed, author and
investor Travis Rush, country music singer Mark Schultz, contemporary Christian
music artist Rusty Wailes, rower Michael Williams, television personality
Notable Performances and Events:. 1960s 1965 – A group forms called Sing Out,
performing the song "Up with People" in their traveling show 1965 – Sing
Out’s “Up with People” was the first event held at Jordan High School in
Watts after the Los Angeles race riots 1966 – Reader’s Digest founder
Dewitt Wallace underwrites first nationwide tour 1967 – The cast of Sing Out
performs at the World Expo in Montreal 1968 – Up with People is incorporated
as a non-profit organization, through the encouragement of President Dwight
Eisenhower and German Chancellor Konrad Adenauer 1969 – Up with People is
received by Pope Paul VI 1970s 1971 – Cast performs with Bob Hope for
President Richard Nixon at the White House 1972 – Cast performs at the Munich
Olympics after the tragic massacre of Israeli athletes 1973 – Up with People
performs two sell-out shows at Carnegie Hall in New York City 1974 – Cast
performs all summer at the World Expo-Spokane sponsored by General Electric
1975 – Up with People invited to facilitate Boston public school
desegregation 1976 – Bicentennial tour of United States (771 cities, 3.9
million live attendance) 1976 – Cast performs in Super Bowl X in Miami,
Florida 1977 – Cast presents three Television Specials with Televisa,
introduced by Anthony Quinn 1978 – Up with People is featured in the Kodak
Centennial Tour 1978 – Cast first visit to People’s Republic of China 1979
– King Juan Carlos of Spain meets cast in Madrid 1980s 1980 – Cast performs
at Super Bowl XIV at the Rose Bowl in Pasadena, California 1982 – Cast
performs at Super Bowl XVI at the Silverdome in Pontiac, Michigan 1983 – Up
with People is received by Pope John Paul II in Rome 1983 – Five Up with
People casts undertake General Motors 75th Anniversary Tour – 96 plants in 56
cities on two continents 1984 – Invited by the King and Queen of Jordan to
Amman for the Jerash Festival 1986 – Cast performs at Super Bowl XX at the
Superdome in New Orleans 1987 – Cast performs at Closing Ceremony of
International Summer Special Olympics 1988 – Cast performs at World Expo 88
in Brisbane, Australia 1988 – Cast performs at Rugby Grand Finals half time
show – National TV – Sponsored by Channel 7 1989 – Cast performs at the
inauguration of George H. W. Bush in Washington, D.C. 1990s 1990 – Up with
People’s 25th Anniversary celebrations are held in Denver, CO 1990 – Soviet
students travel in Up with People for the first time 1992 – Cast performs at
Earth Summit in Brazil – Sponsored by Environmental Foundation – USA 1993
– Up with People relocates world headquarters from Tucson, Arizona to Denver,
Colorado 1993 – Cast performs in Denver for Pope John Paul II and for US
President Bill Clinton 1994 – Performance in Hong Kong for Chinese New Year
– Sponsored by Hong Kong Government 1995 – Up with People establishes its
first formal education agreements with several US universities who will offer
academic credit for UWP program completion to students who enroll at their
university. 1996 – Cast performs at the Olympics in Atlanta and Disneyland in
California – Sponsored by Disney 1997 – Red Cross benefit in Switzerland
and projects in Portugal 1998 – Affiliation with America’s Promise – The
Alliance for Youth 1998 – Cast performs at World Expo in Portugal and for
Scania in Sweden 1999 – Cast performs at Celebration of Peace with Colin
Powell in Denver, Colorado 1999 – Cast performs at International Red Cross
event in Switzerland 2000s 2000 – Up with People participates in and performs
at World Youth Day in Rome 2000 – Up with People holds 35th Anniversary
celebrations in Orlando, Florida 2000 – Up with People suspends operations
2004 – Up with People re-opens with the launch of a new program model called
WorldSmart 2005 – Up with People combines the original Up with People model
with that of WorldSmart and once again enrolls participants in the Up with
People student program. 2006 – Cast A 2006 is the first student tour to
travel under the one-semester Up with People program model. Prior to 2000, all
student tours were one year in length. 2007 – Up with People makes second
appearance in the Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade in New York City 2008 – Up
with People performs in the Opening Ceremony for the Tournament of Roses Parade
in Pasadena, CA 2008 – Viva la Gente (what Up with People is known as in
Latin America) returns to Mexico for a five-week tour 2009 – Up with People
helps Bermuda celebrate its 400th Anniversary with a month-long tour 2009 –
Viva la Gente (Up with People) returns to Mexico for a seven-city national tour
2010s 2010 – UWP cast performs for Queen Silvia of Sweden 2011 – UWP
returns to Pasadena, California as producers and featured performers in the
Opening Celebration for the 122nd Rose Parade 2011 – UWP cast performs for
Princess Margriet of the Netherlands 2011 – UWP welcomes first campers to
inaugural session of Camp Up with People in Harrisonburg, Virginia 2012 - The
"Friends of the Libraries" organization at The University of Arizona holds the
"Arizona is Up With People" event to launch the "Up with People Archive
Project" at UA, establishing a detailed collection of memorabilia, including,
musical scores, photographs, film and video, musical arrangements, costumes and
more. The core of the collection is from Up with People Founder and Chairman
Emeritus J. Blanton Belk and his wife, Betty Belk.
