Ursinus College Ursinus College is a private, independent, coeducational,
liberal arts college located in Collegeville, Pennsylvania. Founded in 1869,
Ursinus sits on a 170-acre wooded campus approximately 25 miles from Center
City Philadelphia. Ursinus is one of the eleven Centennial Conference schools,
a Phi Beta Kappa college, and is a member of the Thomas J. Watson Fellowship
list, Project Pericles, Project DEEP, the Bonner Leader Program, and the
Annapolis Group. The college is also home to the Philip and Muriel Berman
Museum of Art, regarded as one of the nation's finest small-college art
museums. History. 1867 Members of the German Reformed Church begin plans to
establish a college where "young men could be liberally educated under the
benign influence of Christianity." These founders were hoping to establish an
alternative to the seminary at Mercersburg, Pennsylvania, a school they
believed was increasingly heretical to traditional Reformed faith. 1869 The
college is granted a charter by the Legislature of Pennsylvania to begin
operations in its current location on the grounds of Todd’s School (founded
1832) and the adjacent Freeland Seminary (founded 1848). Dr. John Henry
Augustus Bomberger, for whom the campus' signature Romanesque building is named
(see "Gallery", below), served as the college’s first president until his
death in 1890. Bomberger had proposed naming the college after Zacharias
Ursinus, a 16th-century German theologian and an important figure in the
Protestant Reformation, in order to declare the Reformed orthodoxy of the
College. 1870 Instruction begins at the college in September; on October 4, the
Zwinglian Literary Society was founded. For many years the annual opening
meetings of "Zwing" and its rival society, Schaff, were the major events of the
student year. 1881 Women first admitted, as a direct consequence of the closing
of the Pennsylvania Female College in 1880, and a separate literary society for
women, The Olevian, is formed. 1893 The first meeting of the college's alumni
association is held at the Colonnade Hotel in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. 1897
"The Ruby", Ursinus' yearbook is first published by the Class of 1897 as a
tribute to Professor Samuel Vernon Ruby, who collapsed as he was entering
Bomberger Hall in 1896 and died in its chapel, surrounded by students and
teachers who had gathered there for morning prayers. 1921 The first aerial
photograph of Ursinus is taken, by future college president D.L. Helfferich,
and is published in the 1921 "Ruby". 1995 The college appoints Dr. John
Strassburger as its 12th president, the first president from outside the
Ursinus alumni group. Dr. Strassburger was an American Historian, a graduate of
Bates College, Oxford University, and Princeton University. 2006 Ursinus
College is profiled among only 40 colleges in former "New York Times" education
editor Loren Pope's popular guidebook, "Colleges That Change Lives." 2010
Aakash Shah '10 of Harvard Medical School is named Ursinus' first Rhodes
Scholar. 2011 Dr. Bobby Fong, a graduate of Harvard and UCLA and former
president of Butler University, began his tenure as the 13th president of
Ursinus on July 1, 2011. For the third year in a row Ursinus is designated as a
Top Ten "Up and Coming College" by U.S. News & World Report. Ursinus College is
now independent in character with historical but no longer any operational ties
to its church past, and currently operates on a growing $118,000,000 endowment.
Academics. Ursinus established its chapter of Phi Beta Kappa in 1992. At the
time, only 242 of the nation's 3,500 colleges and universities had gained
acceptance into the elite group. The school is a member of the Watson
Foundation List, Project Pericles, Project DEEP, and the Annapolis Group. While
students choose from 60 courses of study, "biology, business and economics, and
English are the three majors with the largest numbers of students." Many
graduates go on to attend law and medical schools, with over 90 percent of
Ursinus applicants accepted. Current students. While the first students
enrolled at Ursinus were almost exclusively Pennsylvanians, today the school's
1,750 students come from 35 states and 12 countries. Twenty percent are
students of color and two percent are international students. The school has a
12:1 student/faculty ratio. Campus and facilities. The campus is northwest of
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and is also within three hours’ driving distance
of New York City, Baltimore, Maryland and Washington, DC. Athletics. Ursinus is
a member of the Centennial Conference, founded in 1992, and which now contains
eleven highly-selective private colleges in the mid-Atlantic region, including
Bryn Mawr, McDaniel, Johns Hopkins, Dickinson, Haverford, Franklin and
Marshall, Swarthmore, Gettysburg, Muhlenberg, and Washington. Ursinus' athletic
teams regularly place regionally and nationally. Its field hockey team was the
2006 National Champion for NCAA Division III. The team earned spots in the
national championship game three times before, between 1975–77, as a Division
I program, and the United States Field Hockey Hall of Fame's permanent home is
at the college. In the immediate years following its founding, there were no
organized athletics at Ursinus College. Baseball matches held against
neighboring towns, hiking along the Perkiomen Creek and in nearby Valley Forge,
and skating, bathing and boating in the Perkiomen were popular pastimes for
students. Students first organized a tennis club in 1888, and intercollegiate
baseball began with play against Swarthmore College, Haverford College, and
Muhlenberg College in 1890. The college's first football team was also fielded
in 1890. A field house with shower and locker facilities was first built in
1909, and a "field cage" with facilities for indoor basketball practice was
built behind the field house in 1910. The college was well known for many years
for its Patterson Field endzone, in which a large sycamore tree grew
undisturbed. Ripley's Believe it or Not featured the famous tree for being the
only one on an active field of athletic play, and the seclusion "of the tree at
night for generations afforded lovers a trysting place. Greek organizations
initiated pledges into their mysteries under its branches." A new sycamore,
growing since 1984 from a seedling taken from the old tree, stood nearby until
a recent turf field project required its removal. In 1974, the NCAA Award of
Valor was presented to the 1973 basketball team. Every member of the team had
entered a burning building, with their combined efforts leading to the rescue
of 14 persons. Gallery. Image:Olin Plaza Ursinus College.jpg| Olin Plaza Image:
Bomberger Hall Ursinus College.jpg| Bomberger Hall Image:Ursinus Bomberger
Hall.JPG|Bomberger Hall during Winter Image:Chadwick Sculptures Ursinus
College.jpg| Chadwick sculptures at Ursinus Image:Reimert Hall.JPG|Reimert Hall
(exterior)
