Sciences Po The "Institut d'études politiques de Paris ( ; ), simply referred
to as Sciences Po" (), is a public research and higher education institution in
Paris, France, which specializes in social sciences. It has the status of
"grand établissement", which allows its admissions process to be highly
selective. Established in 1872, Sciences Po has traditionally educated France's
political and diplomatic elite, and it is generally thought of to be one of the
world's most reputable and prestigious schools of the social sciences. Sciences
Po covers political science as well as economics, history, sociology, law,
finance, business, communication, social and urban policy, management and
journalism. It offers several dual master’s degrees, in partnership with such
institutions as the London School of Economics, King's College London, the Free
University of Berlin, Bocconi University in Milan, ESADE in Barcelona, the
Hertie School of Governance in Berlin, the School of International and Public
Affairs at Columbia University, the Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy at the
National University of Singapore and the University of Pennsylvania Law School.
At the undergraduate level, Sciences Po also offers a dual degree program with
the School of General Studies at Columbia University, University College
London, Keio University and the University of British Columbia. The campus is
located near the Seine River, between Boulevard Saint Germain and Boulevard
Raspail; within walking distance of most major sights, such as "Notre Dame de
Paris", the "Grand Palais", the "Panthéon", and the "Assemblée Nationale". It
is housed primarily in 17th and 18th century mansions located on the left bank,
on and around Rue Saint-Guillaume, Rue des Saints Pères and Rue de
l'Université (in the 7th arondissement). History. 1872–1945. "Sciences Po"
was established in February 1872 as the "École Libre des Sciences Politiques"
by a group of French intellectuals, politicians and businessmen led by Émile
Boutmy, and including Hippolyte Taine, Ernest Renan, Albert Sorel, Paul Leroy
Beaulieu, and François Guizot. Following defeat in the 1870 war, the demise of
Napoleon III, and the Paris Commune, these men sought to reform the training of
French politicians. Politically and economically, people feared France's
international stature was waning due to inadequate teaching of its political
and diplomatic corps. "ELSP" was meant to serve as “the breeding ground where
nearly all the major, non-technical state commissioners were trained.” The
school developed a humanistic and pragmatic teaching program: instructors
included academics as well as ministers, high civil servants, and businessmen.
New discipines such as International Relations, International Law, Political
Economy and Comparative Government were introduced. In August 1894, the British
Association for the Advancement of Science spoke out for the need to advance
the study of politics along the lines of "ELSP". Sidney and Beatrice Webb used
the purpose and curriculum of "Sciences Po" as part of their inspiration for
creating the London School of Economics in 1895. The situation since 1945. As
per ordinance 45-2284, issued by Charles de Gaulle on 9 October 1945, two
entities were created from "ELSP": "Fondation nationale des sciences
politiques" () or "FNSP" and "Institut d'études politiques de Paris" () or
"IEP Paris". Both entities were tasked by the French government to ensure
“the progress and the diffusion, both within and outside France, of political
science, economics, and sociology” The epithet "Sciences Po" was applied to
both entities, which inherited the reputation previously vested in "ELSP".
France's Legislature entrusted "FNSP" with managing "IEP Paris", its library,
and budget, and an administrative council assured the development of these
activities. The curriculum and methodology of the "ELSP" were also the template
for creating an entire system of institutes of political studies (French:
Institut d'études politiques) across France, namely in Strasbourg, Lyon, Aix,
Bordeaux, Grenoble, Toulouse, and then in Rennes and Lille. They are not to be
confounded with Sciences Po's satellite campuses. "FNSP" further strengthened
its role as a scientific publication center with significant donations from the
Rockefeller Foundation. "FNSP" periodicals such as "la Revue française de
science politique", "le Bulletin analytique de documentation", "la Chronologie
politique africaine", and the "Cahiers de la Fondation" as well as its seven
research centres and main publishing house, "Presses de Sciences Po",
contribute to the reputation attained by "Sciences Po" research. Recent
reforms. "Sciences Po" has undergone myriad reforms under Richard Descoings,
Director of "Sciences Po" (1997–2012). "Sciences Po" has introduced a
compulsory year abroad component to its undergraduate degree, and now offers a
multilingual curriculum in French, English, and other languages. New
educational sites have been set up in Nancy, Dijon, Poitiers, Menton, Le Havre
and Reims. "Sciences Po" also set the length of its undergraduate program to
three years and its graduate program to two years in line with the Bologna
Process. "Sciences Po" also implemented reforms in its admissions process.
Previously, "Sciences Po" recruited its students almost exclusively from elite
schools (mostly state-funded) in France, but in March 2001, the school's
governing council widened its admissions policy. From September 2002, "Sciences
Po" began accepting a small batch of students from certain schools located in
economically depressed suburbs of Paris on the basis of their school record and
a 45-minute interview, rather than the name-blind examination all other
students must pass to be admitted. The reform is intended to broaden the socio-
economic characteristics of "Sciences Po" student-body, and gained national and
international media attention for being the first affirmative action experience
in France, despite the initial controversy it brought up it is now broadly
accepted by the French and considered a relative success. Moreover, "Sciences
Po" introduced an alternative recruitment method -the so-called "procédure
internationale"- for foreign students or students with an international
background, as they are not well prepared for the French written examination.
"Sciences Po" also accepts a large contingent of graduate students from abroad
without written exams. With the addition of many masters degree programs almost
exclusively taught in English, Sciences Po has widely globalized its student
body and curriculum. Rankings. In 2012, Sciences Po was ranked the 20th best
university in the world for Politics and International Studies. In September
2007, Sciences Po was rated the 8th best university in the world by the annual
higher education survey conducted by the École des Mines de Paris thus placing
it above both Oxford and Yale. In 2008 Sciences Po ranked 11th, below Oxford
and just above Yale, and in 2009 it ranked 15th. The ranking by the École des
Mines asks CEOs of the 500 biggest multinational companies where they did their
studies. In the Times Higher Education Ranking 2006 and in the QS World
University Rankings 2010 in Social Sciences, Sciences Po was rated 52nd of the
best universities worldwide. In the same ranking in 2012 it ranked 20th
worldwide, 1st in France and 4th in Europe for Politics and International
Studies. Organization. Admissions. Since 2002, the number of applicants has
steadily increased. In 2002, there were 200 applicants for the international
program. By contrast there were 800 applicants in 2008: an increase of 300% in
5 years. For the examination, the number of applicants has doubled in five
years. There was an increase of 500% of the number of applicants with a Summa
cum laude mention. Student union and clubs. There are more than 70 clubs and
organizations, such as Paris International Model United Nations and Sciences Po
Finance (Finance society). Undergraduate program. Description. In 2000,
"Sciences Po" set the length of its undergraduate program to three years and
the length of its graduate program to two years in line with the Bologna
Process. The first three years of study are referred to as the "premiers
cycles", which focuses on the full-range of the social sciences, particularly
public policy, International Relations, economics and political economy,
management studies, finance, geography, constitutional and administrative law,
philosophy, and sociology. Students generally spend their third year of the
"premier cycle" abroad, at one of Sciences Po's nearly 300 partner schools
around the world. Students are, however, also given the option of spending the
year interning for an institution related to their field of study. In addition
to academics, "Sciences Po"'s curriculum incorporates more practice-oriented
skills like teamwork, effective oral communication and presentation skills, and
nurturing leadership potential. Sciences Po's student-body is active, with more
than seventy student clubs, councils, and organizations. As of 2010, almost
half of the student body was foreign. In recent years, "Sciences Po" has
adopted a multi-lingual education policy: students are expected to be
proficient in at least two foreign languages. More than one-third of classes
are provided in languages others than French, including English, Spanish,
German, and Italian. Currently, however, fluency in French is required for
admission to most "Sciences Po" degrees. Satellite Campuses. While all of
Sciences Po's graduate programs are taught in Paris, the school has six
additional undergraduate campuses in France. Each of the six campuses has its
own distinct cultural identity and academic focus. They are designed to widen
the academic concentration of the wider Sciences Po community, and allow
students enrolled in the three-year Sciences Po undergraduate program, the
collège universitaire, to specialize in a given region. Students who wish to
study at either of the six satellite campuses usually need to apply through the
Sciences Po admission services. Upon completing their undergraduate studies by
spending a year abroad, all students usually move to Paris for their graduate
studies (Master). The French-German Undergraduate Program is located in Nancy,
which is at the centre of the Lorraine region of France, and maintains close
ties to the German-speaking world given its proximity to the German border.
Strasbourg and the European Parliament are also located nearby. This premier
cycle focuses on the history of Franco-German relations, and its relevance for
the future integration of the European continent. The main languages of
instruction on campus are English, German, and French, and the student body is
primarily made up of students from France and German-speaking countries. The
European Undergraduate Program is located in Dijon, which is the capital of the
Burgundy region of France. The area is renowned for its winemaking and
gastronomic heritage. A real Europe in miniature, the European Campus of
Sciences Po welcomes students of more than twenty nationalities for the
bachelor with a specific focus on the European Union and on the East Central
European studies. This premier cycle initiates students into the challenges of
the widened European Union, and Central European politics and history. Courses
are taught in English and French, but students may also study at least one
Central-European language (either Czech, Hungarian, Polish), Italian (with an
initiation of Romanian) or Russian. The Ibero-American Undergraduate Program is
located in Poitiers, a small city in western France. This premier cycle
specializes in the politics and history of Iberia and Latin America. Courses
are taught in French, Spanish, Portuguese, and English. The majority of
students come from Spain, Portugal, and Latin America. The Middle Eastern and
Mediterranean Undergraduate Program is located in Menton, a town on the French
Riviera minutes from Monaco and the Italian border. This premier cycle gathers
students from North Africa, the Middle East, the Persian Gulf, Israel, and all
European nations. In particular, it focuses on the study of relationships
between the northern and southern sides of the Mediterranean, as well as the
analysis of the links between Europe and the Middle East. Courses are taught in
French, English, and Arabic. The Euro-Asian Undergraduate Program is located in
Le Havre, a city in Haute Normandy in northern France. The biggest port city of
France, Le Havre, is UNESCO world heritage city. French/European students can
learn Chinese, Japanese, Hindi, and Korean, in addition to English; while Asian
students have to study French and one of the Asian languages, other than their
mother-tongue. All courses during first year are in English, flavored with
French in the background, to put the students at ease; but gradually moves
towards French as the medium of instruction by the end second semester. It is
therefore important to be able to speak, write, read and effectively
communicate in French, else it can become quite challenging, especially when
learning an Asian language is manadatory for all. The Euro-American
Undergraduate Program in Reims, housed in a former Jesuit College, has opened
its doors in September 2010 and focuses on transatlantic relations. 45 minutes
from Paris by train, Reims is famous for being the coronation site of the Kings
of France and for its impressive Gallo-Roman heritage. Its rich past, its
architecture ans its ancient Champagne producing tradition put this city of the
Champagne-Ardennes region at the very heart of European and French history.
Third Year abroad. Richard Descoings has decided in the reforms he engaged at
Sciences Po that every student should spend his or her third year abroad.
Thanks to 350 university partners, students at Sciences Po have multiple
possibilities. Students can also do an internship in a company, a cultural
association, an embassy, etc. Master's degrees. Description. Upon completion of
the third year of undergraduate studies, students return to Paris for a two-
year graduate program of their choosing leading to a Master's degree. Students
from the school's undergraduate programs make up about half of the graduate
programs' student population, the remainder having completed undergraduate
studies elsewhere in France or abroad. Most programs are taught in more than
one language though English-only programs are also available. Students can
choose from a wide array of programs designed either by Sciences Po alone or in
conjunction with other universities. Single Master's degrees. The school's
traditional "single" Master's degrees are suited for those seeking to develop
professional skills in a specific area without losing the benefits of a
generalist education. The curriculum generally comprises a set of generalist
courses known as the "tronc commun," specific courses related to the chosen
field of study, and an internship semester. Students eyeing with an academic
career can apply for admission into research-based programs with an additional
focus on scientific methods. The requirement to gain work experience during the
internship semester is replaced with a requirement to write a Master's thesis.
The school has offered "Master recherche" programs in such fields as economic
governance, theory of organisations, political theory, sociology, and history.
However, as of early 2009, the school is overhauling all of its research-based
programs. Dual Master's degrees. Alternatively, students can apply for
admission into one of the school's double degree programs designed in
conjunction with partner universities in France and abroad. Students are
awarded two degrees upon studying one year at each university. As the writing
of a Master's thesis is often part of the graduation requirements at partner
universities, dual programs can also be suited for those interested in an
academic career. Post-experience Master's degrees. In addition to its pre-
experience graduate programs, Sciences Po is offering a Master of Public
Affairs (MPA). The MPA, which is taught entirely in English, admits students
with at least two years of post-bachelor degree experience. Instructors.
Instruction is provided by a staff of around 1,400 teachers, a majority of whom
are practitioners in their respective fields. Most recently, instructors
included or still include former French Prime Minister Dominique de Villepin,
current WTO president Pascal Lamy, former French Prime Minister Jean-Pierre
Raffarin, former French foreign minister Hubert Védrine, Nobel Prize Laureate
economist Joseph Stiglitz, former Lebanese Minister of Culture Ghassan Salame
and former Economics minister as well as former Managing Director of IMF
Dominique Strauss-Kahn. These instructors are anchored by around 800 tenured
professors Global Public Policy Network. "Sciences Po" offers dual master’s
degrees with the London School of Economics, the School of International and
Public Affairs at Columbia University, the Hertie School of Governance in
Berlin, and the Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy at the National University
of Singapore. This collaboration has existed since the early 1990s, but was
formalized in September 2005 with the official launch of the Global Public
Policy Network in Beijing, China. The partnership is meant to foster greater
academic collaboration between students, faculty, and research centers of four
leading public policy schools in what could arguably be termed four world
capital cities. The network is further intended to facilitate collaboration on
public policy research, student and faculty exchanges, and international
conferences and fora with policymakers from the USA, Germany, UK, France and
Singapore. This alliance has produced five degree programs with LSE, including
masters degrees in International Relations, Negotiation, International
Political Economy, Public Affairs, the Practice of International Affairs, and
Urban Policy, two degree programs with Columbia, specifically a Master in
International Affairs, dual Master of Public Policy and Master of Public
Administration with the Hertie School of Governance, and a Master in Public
Affairs, and one degree program with LKS, a Master in Public Policy. Research.
Doctoral School. The Doctoral School is currently directed by Hervé Crès and
includes 175 faculty members and 600 doctoral students. It was created in 1988
and welcomes students for their Master and PhD studies. Research Master's. The
Research Master’s program entails two years of interdisciplinary instruction
in four basic social sciences: political science, history, sociology and
economics. This interdisciplinary approach is designed to reinforce and round
out graduate-level training. The Research Master’s program prepares students
for doctoral studies and subsequent careers in research and higher education.
But it also opens out into a wider range of career options (work in consulting,
expertise, public opinion polling, publishing etc.) thanks to the links between
the Sciences Po Master’s degree and Research Master’s programs in the form
of joint courses and degrees. Students in the Research Master’s program can
choose from among six concentrations: History and Theory of Politics,
International Relations, Politics and Society in Europe, Comparative Politics,
Sociology of Action, Economic Governance. PhD Program. Sciences Po is
accredited to confer PhD degrees in economics, history, political science and
sociology. The Sciences Po PhD Program counts roughly 600 doctoral candidates,
a third of whom hail from abroad. About 40 defend their dissertations each
year. The program has a long-standing tradition of multi-disciplinary
scholarship. The PhD Program covers 15 fields of study, which follow up on
those offered in the Master’s program: Latin America, Sociological Analysis
of Change, Asia, Economics of International Relations, United States, Europe,
International Finance, Economic Governance, History, Muslim World, Political
Thought, Russia/CIS, Political Science of International Relations, Sociology of
Action, Political Sociology and Public Policy. In addition to academic
training, the PhD Program provides a number of student services, including
financial aid for PhD studies as well as for research abroad, support and
promotion for publications, and job placement guidance and assistance.
Habilitation. Sciences Po awards a French postdoctoral degree called
Habilitation qualifying the holder to supervise doctoral research in economics,
history, political science and sociology. Habilitation is the crowning degree
for university studies in France: it attests to the holder’s high level of
scholarship, the originality of their approach, the ability to master a
research strategy in a sufficiently broad field of inquiry and to supervise
young scholars. It qualifies the holder, moreover, to join the corps of
university professors. Research centres. "FNSP" manages the research faculty
and facilities of "Sciences Po", and is one of the largest social sciences
research bodies in Europe. "FNSP" manages research centres, a doctoral school,
a library and a publishing house. The FNSP manages eight research centres (five
jointly with CNRS). The foundation of "Sciences Po" predates by a few decades
the creation of political science, as such the Institute focuses on all the
social sciences that study the political field. Research networks. Euredocs is
a network run by Sciences Po made up of doctoral students and recent PhD
recipients (who have defended their dissertations within the past three years).
The network addresses the Europeanization of higher education and research,
including such issues as the structure of academic curricula, evaluation/
accreditation procedures, changes in national education policies and university
governance, academic career patterns, the production of knowledge, the impact
of internationalization/globalization etc. CONNEX is a network set up under the
6th Framework Programme for European Research and Technological Development
(2002–2006) to analyze various facets of democratic governance in Europe.
Library and publishing. Library (Bibliothèque de Sciences Po). Founded in
1871, the nucleus of the school’s research is "Bibliothèque de Sciences Po",
which "houses" 650,000 books about social sciences and 4,500 journals and
annual publications, although only approximately one fifteenth of these is
available to students at any given time. The "Bibliothèque" is also the hub of
the Documentary Service which maintains 18,000 press dossiers on a wide range
of sub-topics, and which each years abstracts and indexes some 10,000 articles
from 1,200 periodicals each year. In 1982, the National Ministry of Education
made the "Bibliothèque" the Centre for Acquisition and Dissemination of
Scientific and Technical Information in the field of political science, and
since 1994, it has been the antenna associated with "Bibliothèque Nationale de
France". "Bibliothèque de Sciences Po" is also the main French partner in the
International Bibliography of the Social Sciences, which is based at the London
School of Economics. Publishing House / Presses de Sciences Po. " Presses de
Sciences-Po" is the publishing house of "Sciences Po". It publishes academic
works related to the social sciences, and is the leading French publisher in
the fields of public policy, international relations, political history, French
government, and economics. It publishes 6 French academic journals in the
social sciences, and has 900 titles in its catalogue, with 30 new titles added
annually. Notable faculty and alumni. Politics and Government. "Sciences Po"
alumni and former staff include twenty-eight heads of state or government,
specifically three of the last four French presidents (François Hollande,
Jacques Chirac and François Mitterrand; the fourth one, Nicolas Sarkozy, also
attended "Sciences Po" but failed to graduate, dropping out after flunking his
English classes, thirteen past or present French prime ministers, twelve past
or present foreign heads of state or government, a former United Nations
Secretary-General, the former head of the International Monetary Fund, the
former head of the European Central Bank and the former head of the European
Bank for Reconstruction and Development. Former Portuguese Prime Minister,
José Socrates, is currently an illustrious student of this institution
Business. If nearly every French politician or diplomat has attended "Sciences
Po" since its inception, the school is also well known for educating top
business managers, notably six current CEOs of France's forty largest companies
(Frédéric Oudéa of banking group Societe Generale, Michel Bon of Carrefour,
Jean-Cyril Spinetta of Air France, Serge Weinberg of PPR, Gérard Mestrallet of
Suez, Philippe Camus of Alcatel-Lucent), private bankers such as David René de
Rothschild, the CEO of Lazard Italy, the CFO of Morgan Stanley Europe, the
Director of Credit Suisse World and the Chairman of Credit Suisse Europe as
well as the current head of the European Federation of Businesses, Industries
and Employers and the current head of the French Businesses and Employers Union
and many others. Alumni alliance. Graduates of "Sciences Po" are usually
referred to as "Sciences Po". "Rue Saint Guillaume" is the Sciences Po's alumni
magazine. The vast majority of teachers and professors working in Sciences Po
are alumni. Some French students further their studies at École nationale
d'administration (ENA), which is often viewed as the compulsory educational
step before serving in French politics or diplomacy.
