Utopian socialism Utopian Socialism is a term used to define the first currents
of modern socialist thought as exemplified by the work of Henri de Saint-Simon,
Charles Fourier, and Robert Owen, which inspired Karl Marx and other early
socialists. However, visions of imaginary ideal societies, which competed with
revolutionary social-democratic movements, were viewed as not being grounded in
the material conditions of society and as reactionary. Although it is
technically possible for any set of ideas or any person living at any time in
history to be a utopian socialist, the term is most often applied to those
socialists who lived in the first quarter of the 19th century who were ascribed
the label "utopian" by later socialists as a negative term, in order to imply
naivete and dismiss their ideas as fanciful or unrealistic. Religious sects
whose members live communally, such as the Hutterites, for example, are not
usually called "utopian socialists", although their way of living is a prime
example. They have been categorized as religious socialists by some. Likewise,
modern intentional communities based on socialist ideas could also be
categorized as "utopian socialist". Definition. The utopian socialist thinkers
did not use the term "utopian" to refer to their ideas. Karl Marx and Friedrich
Engels referred to all socialist ideas that were simply a vision and distant
goal for society as utopian. Utopian socialists were likened to scientists who
drew up elaborate designs and concepts for creating what socialists considered
a more equal society. They were contrasted by scientific socialists, likened to
engineers, who were defined as an integrated conception of the goal, the means
to producing it, and the way that those means will inevitably be produced
through examining social and economic phenomena. This distinction was made
clear in Engels' work "" (1892, part of an earlier publication, the "Anti-
Dühring" from 1878). Utopian socialists were seen as wanting to expand the
principles of the French revolution in order to create a more "rational"
society and economic system, and despite being labeled as utopian by later
socialists, their aims were not always utopian with their values often included
rigid support for the scientific method and creating a society based upon such.
A key difference between "utopian socialists" and other socialists (including
most anarchists) is that utopian socialists generally don't feel class struggle
or political revolutions are necessary to implement their ideas; that people of
all classes might voluntarily adopt their plan for society if it were presented
convincingly. They often feel their form of cooperative socialism can be
established among like-minded people within the existing society and establish
small enterprises designed to demonstrate their plan for society. Development.
Utopian socialists never actually used this name to describe themselves; the
term "Utopian socialism" was introduced by Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels in
"The Communist Manifesto" in 1848, although Marx shortly before the publication
of this pamphlet already attacked the ideas of Pierre-Joseph Proudhon in "Das
Elend der Philosophie" (originally written in French, 1847) and used by later
socialist thinkers to describe early socialist or quasi-socialist intellectuals
who created hypothetical visions of egalitarian, communalist, meritocratic, or
other notions of "perfect" societies without actually concerning themselves
with the manner in which these societies could be created or sustained. In "Das
Elend der Philosophie", English title "The Poverty of Philosophy", Marx
criticized the economic and philosophical arguments of Proudhon set forth in
"The System of Economic Contradictions, or The Philosophy of Poverty". Marx
accused Proudhon of wanting to rise above the bourgeoisie. In the history of
Marx' thought and marxism, this work is pivotal in the distinction between the
concepts of utopian socialism and what Marx and the marxists claimed as
"scientific socialism". Although the utopian socialists did not share many
common political, social, or economic perspectives, Marx and Engels argued that
certain intellectual characteristics of the Utopian socialists unified the
disparate thinkers. In "The Communist Manifesto", Marx and Engels wrote, "The
undeveloped state of the class struggle, as well as their own surroundings,
causes Socialists of this kind to consider themselves far superior to all class
antagonisms. They want to improve the condition of every member of society,
even that of the most favored. Hence, they habitually appeal to society at
large, without distinction of class; nay, by preference, to the ruling class.
For how can people, when once they understand their system, fail to see it in
the best possible plan of the best possible state of society? Hence, they
reject all political, and especially all revolutionary, action; they wish to
attain their ends by peaceful means, and endeavor, by small experiments,
necessarily doomed to failure, and by the force of example, to pave the way for
the new social Gospel." Marx and Engels used the term "scientific socialism" to
describe the type of socialism they saw themselves developing. According to
Engels, socialism was not "an accidental discovery of this or that ingenious
brain, but the necessary outcome of the struggle between two historically
developed classesthe proletariat and the bourgeoisie. Its task was no longer to
manufacture a system of society as perfect as possible, but to examine the
historical-economic succession of events from which these classes and their
antagonism had of necessity sprung, and to discover in the economic conditions
thus created the means of ending the conflict." Critics have argued that
Utopian socialists who established experimental communities were in fact trying
to apply the scientific method to human social organization, and were therefore
not Utopian. For instance, Joshua Muravchik, on the basis of Karl Popper's
definition of science as "the practice of experimentation, of hypothesis and
test," argued that "Owen and Fourier and their followers were the real
‘scientific socialists.’ They hit upon the idea of socialism, and they
tested it by attempting to form socialist communities." Muravchik further
argued that, in contrast, Marx made untestable predictions about the future,
and that Marx's view that socialism would be created by impersonal historical
forces may lead one to conclude that it is unnecessary to strive for socialism,
because it will happen anyway. From the mid-19th century onwards, Marxism and
Marxism-Leninism overtook utopian socialism in terms of intellectual
development and number of adherents. At one time, almost half of the world's
population was governed by self-proclaimed Marxists. Utopian socialism in
literature and in practice. Perhaps the first utopian socialist was Thomas More
(1478-1535), who wrote about an imaginary socialist society in his satire
"Utopia", which was published in 1516. The contemporary definition of the
English word "utopia" derives from this work. Saint-Simonianism was a French
political and social movement of the first half of the 19th century, inspired
by the ideas of Claude Henri de Rouvroy, comte de Saint-Simon (1760–1825).
His ideas influenced Auguste Comte (who was, for a time, Saint-Simon's
secretary), Karl Marx, John Stuart Mill, and many other thinkers and social
theorists. Robert Owen (1771–1858) was a successful Welsh businessman who
devoted much of his profits to improving the lives of his employees. His
reputation grew when he set up a textile factory in New Lanark, Scotland, co-
funded by his teacher, the utilitarian Jeremy Bentham, and introduced shorter
working hours, schools for children and renovated housing. He wrote about his
ideas in his book "A New View of Society", which was published in 1813, and "An
Explanation of the Cause of Distress which pervades the civilized parts of the
world" in 1823. He also set up an Owenite commune called New Harmony in
Indiana, USA. This collapsed when one of his business partners ran off with all
the profits. Owen's main contribution to socialist thought was the view that
human social behavior is not fixed or absolute, and that human beings have the
free will to organize themselves into any kind of society they wished. Charles
Fourier (1772–1837) was by far the most utopian of the socialists. Rejecting
the industrial revolution altogether and thus the problems that arose with it,
he made various fanciful claims about the ideal world he envisioned. Despite
some clearly non-socialist inclinations, he contributed significantly - if
indirectly - to the socialist movement. His writings about turning work into
play influenced the young Karl Marx and helped him devise his theory of
alienation. Also a contributor to feminism, Fourier invented the concept of
"phalanstère", units of people based on a theory of passions and of their
combination. Several colonies based on Fourier's ideas were founded in the
United States by Albert Brisbane and Horace Greeley. Étienne Cabet
(1788–1856) who was influenced by Robert Owen, published a book in 1840
entitled "Travel and adventures of Lord William Carisdall in Icaria" in which
he described an ideal communalist society. His attempts to form real socialist
communities based on his ideas, through the Icarian movement however, did not
survive, but one such community was the precursor of Corning, Iowa. Possibly
inspired by Christianity, he coined the word "communism" and influenced other
thinkers, including Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels. Edward Bellamy
(1850–1898), published "Looking Backward" in 1888, a utopian romance novel
about a future socialist society. In Bellamy's utopia, property was held in
common and money replaced with a system of equal credit for all. Valid for a
year and non-transferable between individual persons, expenditure of this
credit was to be tracked via 'credit-cards' (which bear no resemblance to
modern credit cards which are tools of debt-finance). Labour between the ages
of 21-40 was to be compulsory, and organised via various departments of an
'Industrial Army' to which most citizens belonged. However working hours were
to be cut drastically due to technological advances (including organisational).
People were expected to be motivated by a Religion of Solidarity, and e.g.
criminal behavior was treated as a form of mental illness or 'atavism'. It was
the second or third ranking best seller of its time (after Uncle Tom's Cabin
and Ben Hur). Bellamy published a sequel "Equality" in 1897 as a reply to his
critics, and from which the Industrial Army and other authoritarian aspects
were absent. William Morris (1834–1896) published "News from Nowhere" in
1890, partly as a response to Bellamy's "Looking Backwards" which he equated
with the socialism of Fabians such as Sydney Webb. Morris' vision of the future
socialist society was centred around his concept of useful work as opposed to
useless toil, and the redemption of human labour. Morris believed that all work
should be artistic, in the sense that the worker should find it both
pleasurable and an outlet for creativity. Morris' conception of labour thus
bears strong resemblance to Fourier's, whilst Bellamy's (i.e. the reduction of
labour to a minimum) is more akin to that of Saint-Simon or indeed Marx. The
Brotherhood Church in Britain and the Life and Labor Commune in Russia were
based on the Christian anarchist ideas of Leo Tolstoy (1828–1910). Pierre-
Joseph Proudhon (1809–1865) and Peter Kropotkin (1842–1921) wrote about
anarchist forms of socialism in their books. Proudhon wrote "What is Property?"
(1840) and "The System of Economic Contradictions, or The Philosophy of
Poverty" (1847). Kropotkin wrote "The Conquest of Bread" (1892) and "Fields,
Factories and Workshops" (1912). Many of the anarchist collectives formed in
Spain, especially in Aragon and Catalonia, during the Spanish Civil War were
based on their ideas. Many participants in the historical kibbutz movement in
Israel were motivated by utopian socialist ideas, but few examples of this type
of kibbutz remain. Augustin Souchy (1892–1984) spent most of his life
investigating and participating in many kinds of socialist communities. He
wrote about his experiences in his autobiography "Beware! Anarchist!". The
philosopher and pornographer Marquis de Sade (1740-1814) anticipated Charles
Fourier in his project of a harmonious utopia based on the free play of sexual
passion in the pamphlet "Yet Another Effort, Frenchmen, If You Would Become
Republicans", found in Philosophy in the Bedroom. Behavioral psychologist B.F.
Skinner (1904–1990) published "Walden Two" in 1948. The Twin Oaks Community
was originally based on his ideas. Ursula K. Le Guin (born 1929) wrote about an
impoverished anarchist planet in her book "The Dispossessed", which was
published in 1974. The anarchists agree to leave their home planet and colonize
the barren planet in order to avoid a bloody revolution. Related concepts. A
related concept is that of a socialist utopia, usually depicted in works of
fiction as possible ways society can turn out to be in the future, and often
combined with notions of a technologically-revolutionized economy. Some
communities of the modern intentional community movement could be categorized
as utopian socialist. Notable utopian communities. Owenian communities
Fourierist communities Icarian communities Anarchist communities Others
