Value (economics) An economic value is the worth of a good or service as
determined by the market. The economic value of a good or service has puzzled
economists since the beginning of the discipline. First, economists tried to
estimate the value of a good to an individual alone, and extend that definition
to goods which can be exchanged. From this analysis came the concepts "value in
use" and "value in exchange." Wealth maximization predicts that a person will
choose to obtain the good or service in the place where it is cheapest, where
the amount given up is the least. Value is linked to price through the
mechanism of exchange. When an economist observes an exchange, two important
value functions are revealed: those of the buyer and seller. Just as the buyer
reveals what he is willing to pay for a certain amount of a good, so too does
the seller reveal what it costs him to give up the good. Additional information
about value is obtained by the rate at which transactions occur, telling
observers the extent to which the purchase of the good has value over time.
Said another way, value is how much a desired object or condition is worth
relative to other objects or conditions. Economic values are expressed as "how
much" of one desirable condition or commodity will, or would be "given up" in
exchange for some other desired condition or commodity. Among the competing
schools of economic theory there are differing metrics for value assessment and
the metrics are the subject of a "Theory of Value." Value theories are a large
part of the differences and disagreements between the various schools of
economic theory. The various explanations. In neoclassical economics, the value
of an object or service is often seen as nothing but the price it would bring
in an open and competitive market. This is determined primarily by the demand
for the object relative to supply. Many neoclassical economic theories equate
the value of a commodity with its price, whether the market is competitive or
not. As such, everything is seen as a commodity and if there is no market to
set a price then there is no economic value. In classical economics, the value
of an object or condition is the amount of discomfort/labor saved through the
consumption or use of an object or condition (Labor Theory of Value). Though
exchange value is recognized, "economic value" is not, in theory, dependent on
the existence of a market and price and value are not seen as equal. This is
complicated, however, by the efforts of classical economists to connect price
and labor value. Karl Marx, for one, saw exchange value as the "form of
appearance" ["Erscheinungsform"] of value, which implies that, although value
is separate from exchange value, it is meaningless without the act of exchange,
i.e., without a market. In this tradition, Steve Keen makes the claim that
"value" refers to "the innate worth of a commodity, which determines the normal
('equilibrium') ratio at which two commodities exchange." To Keen and the
tradition of David Ricardo, this corresponds to the classical concept of long-
run cost-determined prices, what Adam Smith called "natural prices" and Karl
Marx called "prices of production." It is part of a cost-of-production theory
of value and price. Ricardo, but not Keen, used a "labor theory of price" in
which a commodity's "innate worth" was the amount of labor needed to produce
it. "The value of a thing in any given time and place", according to Henry
George, "is the largest amount of exertion that anyone will render in exchange
for it. But as men always seek to gratify their desires with the least exertion
this is the lowest amount for which a similar thing can otherwise be obtained."
In another classical tradition, Marx distinguished between the "value in use"
(use-value, what a commodity provides to its buyer), "value" (the socially-
necessary labour time it embodies), and "exchange value" (how much labor-time
the sale of the commodity can claim, Smith's "labor commanded" value). By most
interpretations of his labor theory of value, Marx, like Ricardo, developed a
"labor theory of price" where the point of analyzing value was to allow the
calculation of relative prices. Others see values as part of his sociopolitical
interpretation and critique of capitalism and other societies, and deny that it
was intended to serve as a category of economics. According to a third
interpretation, Marx aimed for a theory of the dynamics of price formation, but
did not complete it. In 1860, John Ruskin published a critique of the economic
concept of value from a moral point of view. He entitled the volume "Unto This
Last", and his central point was this: "It is impossible to conclude, of any
given mass of acquired wealth, merely by the fact of its existence, whether it
signifies good or evil to the nation in the midst of which it exists. Its real
value depends on the moral sign attached to it, just as strictly as that of a
mathematical quantity depends on the algebraic sign attached to it. Any given
accumulation of commercial wealth may be indicative, on the one hand, of
faithful industries, progressive energies, and productive ingenuities: or, on
the other, it may be indicative of mortal luxury, merciless tyranny, ruinous
chicanery." Gandhi was greatly inspired by Ruskin's book and published a
paraphrase of it in 1908. Economists such as Ludwig von Mises asserted that
"value," meaning exchange value, was always the result of subjective value
judgements. There was no price of objects or things that could be determined
without taking these judgements into account, as manifested by markets. Thus,
it was false to say that the economic value of a good was equal to what it cost
to produce or to its current replacement cost. Value in the most basic sense
can be referred to as "Real Value" or "Actual Value." This is the measure of
worth that is based purely on the utility derived from the consumption of a
product or service. Utility derived value allows products or services to be
measured on outcome instead of demand or supply theories that have the inherent
ability to be manipulated. Illustration: The real value of a book sold to a
student who pays $50.00 at the cash register for the text and who earns no
additional income from reading the book is essentially zero. However; the real
value of the same text purchased in a thrift shop at a price of $0.25 and
provides the reader with an insight that allows him or her to earn $100,000.00
in additional income is $100,000.00 or the extended lifetime value earned by
the consumer. This is value calculated by actual measurements of ROI instead of
production input and or demand vs. supply. No single unit has a fixed value.
Value is intrinsically related to the worth derived by the consumer. [Burke
(2005)]. Connected concepts. The theory of value is closely related to that of
allocative efficiency, the quality by which firms produce those goods and
services most valued by society. The market value of a machine part, for
example, will depend upon a variety of objective facts involving its efficiency
versus the efficiency of other types of part or other types of machine to make
the kind of products that consumers will value in turn. In such a case, market
value has both objective and subjective components. In philosophy, economic
value is a subcategory of a more general philosophical value, as defined in
goodness and value theory or in the science of value.
