Value of life The potency of life (or cost of life) is an economic value
assigned to life in general, or to specific living organisms. In social and
political sciences, it is the marginal cost of death prevention in a certain
class of circumstances. As such, it is a statistical term, the cost of reducing
the (average) number of deaths by one. It is an important issue in a wide range
of disciplines including economics, health care, adoption, political economy,
insurance, worker safety, environmental impact assessment, and globalization.
Discussions about the value of life would be more-or-less limited to university
philosophy departments and religious groups if it were not for the fact that
this value must be calculated in an exact quantitative way by practitioners in
these disciplines. In industrial nations, the justice system considers a human
life "priceless", thus illegalizing any form of slavery; i.e., humans cannot be
bought for any price. However, with a limited supply of resources or
infrastructural capital (e.g. ambulances), or skill at hand, it is impossible
to save every life, so some trade-off must be made. Also, this argumentation
neglects the statistical context of the term. It is not commonly attached to
lives of individuals or used to compare the value of one person's life relative
to another person's. It is mainly used in circumstances of saving lives as
opposed to taking lives or "producing" lives. Treatment in economics. There is
no standard concept for the value of a specific human life in economics.
However, when looking at risk / reward trade-offs that people make with regard
to their health, economists often consider the value of a statistical life
(VSL). The VSL is the value that an individual places on a marginal change in
their likelihood of death. Note that the VSL is very different from the value
of an actual life. It is the value placed on changes in the likelihood of
death, not the price someone would pay to avoid certain death. Economists often
estimate the VSL by looking at the risks that people are voluntarily willing to
take and how much they must be paid for taking them. These types of studies,
which look at a person's actual choices, are known as revealed preference
studies. A common source of such choices is the labor market, where jobs with
greater risk of death are seen to correlate with higher wages. Much of this
research uses a wage hedonic approach, which looks at how wages change with
changes in job characteristics. Basically, these studies regress wages on job
characteristics like risk of death, occupation, industry, risk of injury,
location, etc. By controlling for as many job characteristics as possible,
researchers hope to tease out the portion of the wage that is compensating for
the risk of death on the job. A recent summary of this literature is the 2003
paper by Viscusi and Aldy. Another method economists can use to estimate the
VSL is by simply asking people ( perhaps through questionnaires) how much they
would be willing to pay for a reduction in the likelihood of dying, perhaps by
purchasing safety improvements. These types of studies are referred to as
stated preference studies. A well known problem with this method is the so-
called "hypothetical bias", whereby people tend to overstate their valuation of
goods and services. Policy applications of the VSL. Data for these studies
frequently include wage data from the Current Population Survey and workplace
risk data from the Census of Fatal Occupational Injuries. Both sets of data are
collected on behalf of the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The value of
improvements to health conditions were converted to dollars by estimating the
resulting decrease in the incidence of fatalities and valuing this change using
estimations of the VSL from the literature. A table of specific values used for
the various improvements in health can be found in the report's executive
summary. Tobacco industry. The cigarette industry was particularly concerned
with "Value of Life" calculations since it came under regular attack in the
1980s and 1990s for the "Social Cost" of smoking on the national economy. The
economic arguments for increasing excise taxes on cigarettes was that these
taxes compensated the State for a whole range of externalities that smoking
imposed, including the costs of hospital and medical care for smokers and non-
smokers alike, disability pensions for smoking-related diseases, welfare
payments made to surviving spouses, the cost of street, home and office
cleaning, the burden of home and forest fires, etc. To counter this argument,
the tobacco industry was increasingly forced to fall back on calculations made
by a network of employed academics, who were paid to write op-ed articles from
their local newspapers expressing the opinion that smokers already 'paid their
way'. They relied on an argument by Kip Viscusi which became known as the
"death benefits" -- the idea that, since smokers died earlier than non-smokers,
the nation was being saved hospital, pension and nursing-home costs, and that
these offset many of the external costs [depending on how these are calculated.
Uses. Since resources are finite, tradeoffs are inevitable, even regarding
potential life-or-death decisions. The assignment of a value to individual life
is one possible approach to attempting to make rational decisions about these
tradeoffs. When deciding on the appropriate level of healthcare spending, a
typical method is to equate the marginal cost of the healthcare to the marginal
benefits received. In order to obtain a marginal benefit amount, some
estimation of the dollar value of life is required. In risk management
activities such as in the areas of workplace safety, and insurance, it is often
useful to put a precise economic value on a given life. There can be no such
thing as a perfectly safe or risk free system—one can always make a system
safer by spending more money. However, there are diminishing returns involved.
In transportation modes it is very important to consider the external cost that
is paid by the society but is not calculated, for making it more sustainable.
Estimates of the value of life. In the US, the following estimates have been
applied to the value of life. The estimates are either for "one year" of
additional life or for the statistical value of a "single" life. The income
elasticity of the value of statistical life has been estimated at 0.5 to 0.6.
Developing markets have smaller statistical value of life. The statistical
value of life also decreases with age. Criticisms. There are also
intergenerational aspects to the value of life. Some economists calculate
social discount rates based on the interest rates prevalent in financial
markets. The higher the social discount rate, the more future generations are
devalued relative to the current generation. The anti-globalization movement
objects to the obvious disparity between the value assigned to life in
developed nations versus developing nations—most particularly as reflected in
World Bank, World Trade Organization (WTO), and International Monetary Fund
(IMF) decisions. They point to such numbers as the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC) assumption that a developed nation can pay fifteen times
more than a developing nation to avert a death due to climate change, as
evidence of systematic neglect of the value of statistical life in the poorer
South, as opposed to the more developed North. Some also fear that more
standard global value of life mechanisms could have consequences for the
working people in the developed nations. A few also debate as to whether animal
life deserves to have a value assigned to it, such as in the field of
biodiversity. A moral argument associated with this is the Great Ape personhood
debate, which has become especially poignant since the recent advocacy by some
scientists to move the two chimpanzee species into the genus "Homo" (previously
it was considered a hominid).
