Value of Earth In green economics, value of Earth is the ultimate in ecosystem
valuation, and important to value of life calculations. It begins with the
simple problem that if the Earth ceases to support life, and human life does
not continue elsewhere, all economic activity will also cease. Methods of
estimation. As one might expect, these all produce quite high values for the
entire Earth, usually at least in the hundreds of quadrillions of US dollars.
This seems appropriate. However, even with this sum in hand, it seems unlikely
that even experienced reconstruction subcontractors could complete the task of
replacing Earth, certainly not without using Earth itself as a base. Rent for
use of Earth and its orbit might then also have to be included, and it would be
hard to price this without calculating the price of the Earth, again. One way
around this is to simply declare the Earth priceless or to be exactly and only
as valuable as all financial capital in circulation. This may be equivalent to
declaring it worthless, however, as neo-classical economics deals very poorly
with assets that are too valuable to trade actively in markets. Replacement
methods. "(Note: All the numbers in this section use the short scale, not the
long scale.)" This represents the minimum value of the Earth using today's
technology. Because the project failed, the true value must be higher than this
amount. However, economies of scale in biosphere production would obviously
reduce this number significantly. Mass production of one billion biosphere
units would reduce the per-unit cost by several orders of magnitude. To put
this into perspective, assuming the total value of the gross world product is
$30 trillion, that sum divided into $1.95 × 1017 = 6500 times the world's
current gross product. From this we can estimate the cost of cutting a tree or
taking a single fish from the ocean if there is evidence that that yielded
resource unit may not be replaced. The probability that the resource will be
replaced reduces the cost, so a 50% chance that it will be replaced implies
that the cost should be cut in half, since two of them can be taken, on
average, before one is not replaced. These estimates can be done using a linear
method, for initial estimates, or using an exponential model to place greater
value on the remaining elements of a declining resource. Further calculation of
the value of one tree (replaced or not), a metric ton of fish, or of soil
carbon depends on these probabilities. The curve for replaced and unreplaced
biomass will be relatively equivalent as long as the total biomass is
relatively large. As the total biomass in a specific area becomes depleted to
the point where the entire sustainability of the biomass is threatened, then
the exponential part of the curve comes into play. Ultimately, we are left with
the question, how much are we prepared to pay in order to avert imminent death
as individuals. That sum is relatively large. As resources are depleted to the
point where the conflict over what remains begins to dominate the risk of
taking it, it becomes more obvious due to costs of protection and securing
property. So, any calculation based on costs of replacing ecosystems tends to
lead to a calculation based on costs of protecting ecosystems so that their
yield can be controlled - but only at the tail end of the process, when it is
too late to replace them. There are implications for costs of national security
and climate change, both of which may have to be counted as full factors of
production in such an analysis, if not full styles of capital - a factor which
if not present in tight parameters prevents all gains from all investment in
production. Purpose in economic risk assessment. Although assigning a value to
the entire Earth may seem whimsical, it is highly important in risk assessment.
In the extreme view, absolutely nothing can be carried out without some risk
that it will directly or indirectly exterminate life on earth, however usually
the probability is so low as to be negligible. Another way of stating the value
of the earth is the risk we are willing to take with it. And the amount of risk
we are willing to take must be balanced against the possible reward. Such
calculation will invariably use other moral or environmental assumptions for
other outcomes, such as the value of human life. To give a contrived example,
supposing a research project could yield a cure for a certain fatal disease,
but there is a small risk that the experiment itself could accidentally
(through incompetence, negligence or malicious intent say) spread the disease
in a virulent form - with a remote chance of wiping out the planet (or at least
life on earth). By assigning a value to the potential lives saved and to the
potential loss of life in failure, it becomes simple to assess how much risk is
too much risk. When used in these situations the value used for the Earth could
vary markedly, and have little bearing on real currency. Other situations,
however, may have more direct financial application, such as an asteroid
defence mechanism. There is a minute probability of an asteroid strike large
enough to destroy the planet - what should we do about this? Clearly if we
poured the entire GDP of the planet into protecting against this, we could
minimise the risk, but might there be better things to spend it on? Instead,
armed with a value for the planet, we can put in place systems that provide
early warning and a good measure of the probability of asteroid impact. This
knowledge itself reduces the average cost of a meteor impact to an "acceptable"
level.
