Value added In business, the difference between the sale price and the
production cost of a product is the unit profit. In economics, the sum of the
unit profit, the unit depreciation cost, and the unit labor cost is the unit
value added. Summing value added per unit over all units sold is total value
added. Total value added is equivalent to Revenue less Outside Purchases (of
materials and services). Value Added is a higher portion of Revenue for
integrated companies, e.g., manufacturing companies, and a lower portion of
Revenue for less integrated companies, e.g., retail companies. Total value
added is very closely approximated by Total Labor Expense (including wages,
salaries, and benefits) plus "Cash" Operating Profit (defined as Operating
Profit plus Depreciation Expense, i.e., Operating Profit before Depreciation).
The first component (Total Labor Expense) is a return to labor and the second
component (Operating Profit before Depreciation) is a return to capital
(including capital goods, land, and other property). In national accounts used
in macroeconomics, it refers to the contribution of the factors of production,
i.e., capital (e.g., land and capital goods) and labor, to raising the value of
a product and corresponds to the incomes received by the owners of these
factors. The national value added is shared between capital and labor (as the
factors of production), and this sharing gives rise to issues of distribution.
Outside of economics, value added refers to "extra" feature(s) of an item of
interest (product, service, person etc.) that go beyond the standard
expectations and provide something "more" while adding little or nothing to its
cost. Value-added features give competitive edges to companies with otherwise
more expensive products. Value-added methods and measurements are also being
utilized in Education as part of a national movement towards teacher evaluation
and accountability in the United States. This type of measure is known as a
Value Added Modeling or Measures National accounts. The factors of production
provide "services" which raise the unit price of a product (X) relative to the
cost per unit of intermediate goods used up in the production of X. In national
accounts such as the United Nations System of National Accounts (UNSNA) or the
United States National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA), gross value added is
obtained by deducting intermediate consumption from gross output. Thus gross
value added is equal to net output. Net value added is obtained by deducting
consumption of fixed capital (or depreciation charges) from gross value added.
Net value added therefore equals gross wages, pre-tax profits net of
depreciation, and indirect taxes less subsidies. Marxist interpretation. Karl
Marx's concept of the value product is similar to the national accounting
concept of net national product, or net value added, since it is the value of
the gross product minus expenditure on constant capital, where the latter
refers to the costs of intermediate products and depreciation. In turn, value
added is equal to the sum of variable capital (labor's compensation) and
surplus-value (pre-tax profit income). The argument is that labor creates a new
value (value added) that covers the cost of both its own wages (payment for
workers' ability to do labor, i.e. for their labor power) and surplus-value
(property income). In Marx's example in his Das Kapital, workers exert enough
labor-time during a working day to pay for the cost of reproducing their
ability to work during that day (their labor-power) and then did extra work
(surplus-labor) to pay incomes to capitalists, land-owners, and the like. As
labor is the active and conscious factor in the production process, capital
goods ("means of production") and gifts from nature ("land," natural resources)
only "facilitate" labor's transformation of raw materials into other products,
raising labor's physical productivity (its ability to produce use-values) and
its value-productivity (its ability to produce use-values that can be sold for
money). In contrast, Neoclassical economics regards the incomes constituting
added value as the "reward" for services rendered. In his critique of political
economy, Marx saw incomes as results of production under conditions of
capitalist exploitation. The capitalist class control over the production
process and the growth of the economy (capital accumulation) gives them the
power to claim the benefits of the extra labor done by the workforce. This is
enforced by the normal existence of mass unemployment, what Marx called the
"reserve army of labor." Differences between Marxist and neo-classical
accounting of value added. A difference between Marxist theory and conventional
national accounts concerns the interpretation of the distinction between "new"
value created, transfers of value and "conserved value", and of the definition
of "production". For example, Marxist theory regards the "imputed rental value
of owner-occupied housing" which is included in GDP as a "fictitious" entry; if
the housing is owner-occupied, this housing cannot also yield real income from
its market-based rental value at the same time. "6.89. Heads of household who
own the dwellings which the households occupy are formally treated as owners of
unincorporated enterprises that produce housing services consumed by those same
households. As well-organized markets for rented housing exist in most
countries, the output of own-account housing services can be valued using the
prices of the same kinds of services sold on the market in line with the
general valuation rules adopted for goods or services produced on own account.
In other words, the output of the housing services produced by owner-occupiers
is valued at the estimated rental that a tenant would pay for the same
accommodation, taking into account factors such as location, neighbourhood
amenities, etc. as well as the size and quality of the dwelling itself. The
same figure is recorded under household final consumption expenditures."
Marxist economists object to this accounting procedure on the ground that the
monetary imputation made refers to a flow of income which does not exist,
because most home owners do not rent out their homes if they are living in
them. Another important difference concerns the treatment of property rents,
land rents and real estate rents. In the Marxian interpretation, many of these
rents, insofar as they are paid out of the sales of current output of
production, constitute part of the new value created and part of the real cost
structure of production. They should therefore be included in the valuation of
the net product. This contrasts with the conventional national accounting
procedure, where many property rents are excluded from new value-added and net
product on the ground that they do not reflect a productive contribution. Value
added tax. Value added tax (VAT) is a tax on sales. It works by being charged
on the sale price of new goods and services, whether purchased by intermediate
or final consumers. However, intermediate consumers may reclaim VAT paid on
their inputs, so that the net VAT is based on the value added by producing this
good or service.
