Vanguard party A vanguard party is a political party at the fore of a mass-
action political movement and of a revolution. In the praxis of political
science, the concept of the vanguard party, composed of professional
revolutionaries, was first effected by the Bolshevik Party in the Russian
Revolution of 1917. Lenin (Vladimir Ilyich Ulyanov), the first leader of the
Bolsheviks, coined the term "vanguard party", and argued that such a party was
necessary in order to provide the practical and political leadership that would
impel the proletariat (urban workers and peasants) to achieve a communist
revolution. Hence, as a political-science concept and term, "vanguard party"
most often is associated with Leninism; however, similar concepts (under
different names) also are present in other revolutionary ideologies. The
Communists, therefore, are, on the one hand, practically the most advanced and
resolute section of the working-class parties of every country, that section
which pushes forward all others; on the other hand, theoretically, they have
over the great mass of the proletariat the advantage of clearly understanding
the lines of march, the conditions, and the ultimate general results of the
proletarian movement. The immediate aim of the Communists is the same as that
of all other proletarian parties: Formation of the proletariat into a class,
overthrow of the bourgeois supremacy, conquest of political power by the
proletariat. According to Vladimir Lenin, the purpose of the vanguard party is
to establish a dictatorship of the proletariat; supported by the working class.
The change of ruling class, from the bourgeoisie to the proletariat, makes
possible the full development of socialism. In early 20th century Russia, Lenin
argued that the vanguard party would lead the revolution to depose the
incumbent Tsarist government, and transfer government power to the working
class. In the pamphlet "What is to be Done?" (1902), Lenin said that a
revolutionary vanguard party, mostly recruited from the working class, should
lead the political campaign, because it was the only way that the proletariat
could successfully achieve a revolution; unlike the economist campaign of trade
union struggle advocated by other socialist political parties and later by the
anarcho-syndicalists. Like Karl Marx, Lenin distinguished between the two
aspects of a revolution, the economic campaign (labour strikes for increased
wages and work concessions), which featured diffused plural leadership; and the
political campaign (socialist changes to society), which featured the decisive
revolutionary leadership of the Bolshevik vanguard party. History. Marxist
uses. As he surveyed the European milieu in the late 1890s, Lenin found several
theoretic problems with the Marxism of the late 19th century. Contrary to what
Karl Marx had predicted, capitalism had become stronger in the last third of
the 19th century. In Western Europe, the working class had become poorer,
rather than becoming politically progressive, thinking people; hence, the
workers and their trade unions, although they had continued to militate for
better wages and working conditions, had failed to develop a revolutionary
class consciousness, as predicted by Marx. To explain that undeveloped
political awareness, Lenin said that the division of labour in a bourgeois
capitalist society prevented the emergence of a proletarian class
consciousness, because of the ten-to-twelve-hour workdays that the workers
laboured in factories, and so had no time to learn and apply the philosophic
complexities of Marxist theory. Finally, in trying to effect a revolution in
Tsarist Imperial Russia (1721–1917), Lenin faced the problem of an autocratic
régime that had outlawed almost all political activity. Although the Tsarist
autocracy could not enforce a ban on political ideas, until 1905 — when Tsar
Nicholas II (1894–1917) agreed to the formation of a national duma — the
Okhrana, the Tsarist secret police, suppressed every political group seeking
social and political changes, including those with a democratic program. To
counter such political conditions, Lenin said that a professional revolutionary
organisation was necessary to organise and lead the most class-conscious
workers into a politically coherent movement. About the Russian class struggle,
in the book "What Is to Be Done?" (1902), against the “economist” trend of
the socialist parties (who proposed that the working class would develop a
revolutionary consciousness from demanding solely economic improvements), Lenin
said that the “history of all countries bears out the fact that, through
their own powers alone, the working class can develop only a trade-union
consciousness”; and that under reformist, trade-union leadership, the working
class could only engage spontaneous local rebellions to improve their political
position within the capitalist system, and that revolutionary consciousness
developed unevenly. Nonetheless, optimistic about the working class’s ability
to develop a revolutionary class consciousness, Lenin said that the missing
element for escalating the class struggle to revolution was a political
organisation that could relate to the radicalism of political vanguard of the
working class, who then would attract many workers from the middling policies
of the reformist leaders of the trade unions. It is often believed that Lenin
thought the bearers of class consciousness were the common intellectuals who
made it their vocation to conspire against the capitalist system, educate the
public in revolutionary theory, and prepare the workers for the proletarian
revolution and the dictatorship of the proletariat that would follow. Yet,
unlike his Menshevik rivals, Lenin distinguished himself by his hostility
towards the bourgeois intelligentsia, and was routinely criticised for placing
too much trust in the intellectual ability of the working class to transform
society through its own political struggles. Like other political organisations
that sought to change Imperial Russian society, Lenin's Bolshevik Party
resorted to conspiracy, and operated in the political underground. Against
Tsarist repression, Lenin argued for the necessity of confining membership to
people who were professionally trained to combat the Okhrana secret police;
however, at its core, the Bolshevik Party was an exceptionally flexible
organisation who pragmatically adapted policy to changing political situations.
After the Revolution of 1905, Lenin proposed that the Bolshevik Party "open its
gates" to the militant working class, who were rapidly becoming political
radicals, in order for the Party to become a mass-action political party with
genuine roots in the working class movement. In the 20th century, the Communist
Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU) continued regarding itself as the
institutionalization of Marxist-Leninist political consciousness in the Soviet
Union; therein lay the justification for its political control of Soviet
society. Article 6 of the 1977 Soviet Constitution refers to the CPSU as the
"leading and guiding force of Soviet society, and the nucleus of its political
system, of all state organizations and public organizations". The CPSU,
precisely because it was the bearer of Marxist-Leninist ideology, determined
the general development of society, directed domestic and foreign policy, and
"imparts a planned, systematic, and theoretically substantiated character" to
the struggle of the Soviet people for the victory of Communism. Nonetheless,
the political role of the vanguard party, as outlined by Lenin, is disputed
among the contemporary communist movement. Lenin's contemporary in the
Bolshevik Party, Leon Trotsky, further developed and established the vanguard
party with the creation of the Fourth International. Trotsky, who believed in
worldwide permanent revolution, proposed that a vanguard party must be an
international political party who organised the most militant activists of the
working classes of the countries of the world. Although the Fourth
International faded from the public upon the death of Trotsky, there continued
some efforts to revive the concept of an international vanguard party. Non-
Marxist uses. Although Lenin developed the term and it is used to describe
Marxist-Leninist parties, the term is also sometimes used for some Islamist
parties. Islamist writers Abul Ala Maududi and Sayyid Qutb both urged the
formation of an Islamic vanguard to restore Islamic society. Qutb talked of an
Islamist vanguard in his book Ma'alim fi al-Tariq ("Milestones") and Maududi
formed an Islamist party Jamaat-e-Islami whose goal was to establish an
ideological state, administered for God solely by Muslims "whose whole life is
devoted to the observance and enforcement" of Islamic law. The party members
formed an elite group (called "arkan") with "affiliates" ("mutaffiq") and then
"sympathisers" ("hamdard") beneath them. Another elite or vanguard Islamist
party is Hizb ut-Tahrir, which seeks to take power for a pan-Islamic state not
by a vanguard-led armed struggle, but by a Coup d'état. The party seeks to
obtains "support from army generals, leaders, and other influential figures or
bodies to facilitate the change of the government." According to Roger Eatwell,
some fascist parties have also operated in ways similar to the concept of a
vanguard party.
