Vanguardism In the context of revolutionary struggle, vanguardism is a strategy
whereby an organization (usually a vanguard party, though not always) attempts
to place itself at the center of the movement, and steer it in a direction
consistent with its ideology. Vanguardism may more generally refer to
cooperation between avant-garde individuals advancing in any field. Innovative
writers and artists are often described as being in the vanguard of development
of new forms and styles of art. Foundations. Vladimir Lenin popularized
political vanguardism as conceptualized by Karl Kautsky, detailing his thoughts
in one of his earlier works, "What is to be done?". Lenin argued that Marxism's
complexity and the hostility of the establishment (the bourgeois state or, in
the case of Imperial Russia, the feudal state) required a close-knit group of
individuals—the vanguard—to safeguard the revolutionary ideology. While
Lenin allegedly wished for a revolutionary organization akin to his
contemporary Social Democratic Party, which was open to the public and more
democratic in organization, the Russian autocracy prevented this. Leninists
argue that Lenin's ideal vanguard party would be one where membership is
completely open: "The members of the Party are they who accept the principles
of the Party programme and render the Party all possible support." This party
could, in theory, be completely transparent: the "entire political arena is as
open to the public view as is a theater stage to the audience." A party that
supposedly implemented democracy to such an extent that "the general control
(in the literal sense of the term) exercised over every act of a party man in
the political field brings into existence an automatically operating mechanism
which produces what in biology is called the “survival of the fittest”."
This party would be completely open to the public eye as it conducted its
business which would mainly consist of educating the proletariat to remove the
false consciousness that had been instilled in them. In its first phase, the
vanguard party would exist for two reasons. Firstly, it would protect Marxism
from outside corruption from other ideas as well as advance its concepts. And
secondly, it would educate the proletariat class in Marxism in order to cleanse
them of their false individual consciousness and instill the revolutionary
class consciousness in them. If the vanguard is successful in this lofty goal,
on the eve of revolution the entirety of the working class population would be
enlightened, Marxist revolutionaries. Furthermore a great number of them,
namely their most intelligent members, would belong to the vanguard's inner
circle as professional revolutionaries. Thus the organization would quickly
include the entire working class. Once the proletariat gained class
consciousness and thus was prepared to revolt against the ruling classes, the
vanguard party would serve another purpose. The party would coordinate the
proletariat through its revolution by acting as a military command hub of
sorts. This is, according to Leninists, a vital function as mass revolutions
can sometimes be easily crushed by the disciplined military of the ruling
classes. The vanguards would serve as commanders of the revolt, chosen to their
positions by "democratic natural selection". In Lenin's view, after the
revolution the working class would implement the dictatorship of the
proletariat to rule the new worker's state through the first phase of
communism, socialism. Here it can be said that the vanguard disappears, as all
of society now consists of revolutionaries. Implementation in Imperial Russia.
Because of Russia's strong autocratic state, the vanguard party had to be
implemented differently. It was, by necessity, a highly secretive organization.
Its members would print and distribute illegal pamphlets and newspapers (for
the above-mentioned alleged purpose of educating the masses), rarely would they
sleep in the same bed twice. Members had to be skilled at evading the Czar's
secret police as well as being knowledgeable Marxists. Despite these troubles
the Russian Bolsheviks were eventually successful in overthrowing the imperial
government but only after countless cases of them being exiled, imprisoned and
executed. Current use. Vanguardism continues to be used as a political strategy
by Leninist parties of just about all varieties Although anarchists and radical
libertarians reject party vanguardism in principle as inherently authoritarian,
the practices of some anarchist groups have been criticized by their peers for
constituting vanguardism of the intellectual, if not organizational, variety.
Vanguardism is in fact an intrinsic element of anarcho-syndicalism and
revolutionary syndicalism. Theorists such as Georges Sorel and vanguard groups
such as the Spanish Federación Anarquista Ibérica viewed the ordinary worker
as being too complacent to revolt spontaneously, due to his having been
'brainwashed' by capitalism and reformism, and it was thus seen to be the duty
of the 'enlightened' anarchist to prepare a revolutionary situation in which
spontaneous mass rebellion could erupt. At times, this even led to an
ostensibly elitist anarchism: the French CGT's reformist majority was excluded
from input in the pivotal 1906 Amiens Congress, as the Union's
anarchosyndicalist leaders considered moderate workers to be unqualified to
decide policy for a Union whose direction was to be revolutionary and
apolitical. Further reading. Arts Maerhofer, John. 2009. Rethinking the
Vanguard: Aesthetic and Political Positions in the Modernist Debate, 1917-1962.
New Castle: Cambridge Scholars Press. ISBN 1-4438-1135-1 Politics Polemics
