Veblen good In economics, a Veblen good is a member of a group of commodities
for which people's preference for buying them increases as their price
increases (as greater price confers greater status) instead of decreasing
according to the law of demand. A Veblen good is often also a positional good.
The Veblen effect is named after economist Thorstein Veblen, who first
identified the concepts of conspicuous consumption and status-seeking in 1899.
Rationale. Some types of luxury goods, such as high-end wines, designer
handbags, and luxury cars are Veblen goods, in that decreasing their prices
decreases people's preference for buying them because they are no longer
perceived as exclusive or high-status products. Similarly, a price increase may
increase that high status and perception of exclusivity, thereby making the
good even more preferable. Often such goods are no better or are even worse
than their lower priced counterparts. However, this 'anomaly' is mitigated when
one understands that the demand curve does not necessarily have only one peak.
The goods generally thought to be Veblen goods are still subject to the curve
since demand does not increase with price infinitely. Demand may go up with
price within a certain price range, but at the top of that range the demand
will cease to increase before it begins to fall again with further price
increases. At the other end of the spectrum, where luxury items priced equal to
non-luxury items of lower quality, all else being equal more people would buy
the luxury items, even though a few Veblen-seekers would not. Thus, even a
Veblen good is subject to the dictum that demand moves conversely to price,
although the response of demand to price is not consistent at all points on the
demand curve. Veblen goods and consumer psychology are major themes of such
late 20th-century novels as Viktor Pelevin's "Generation "П"" and Frédéric
Beigbeder's "99 Francs". Related concepts. These effects are discussed in a
classic article by Leibenstein (1950). The concept of the counter-Veblen effect
is less well known, although it logically completes the family. None of these
effects in itself predicts what will happen to actual quantity of goods
demanded (the number of units purchased) as prices change—they refer only to
preferences or propensities to purchase. The actual effect on quantity demanded
will depend on the range of other goods available, their prices, and their
substitutabilities for the goods concerned. The effects are anomalies within
demand theory because the theory normally assumes that preferences are
independent of price or the number of units being sold. They are therefore
collectively referred to as "interaction effects". The interaction effects are
a different kind of anomaly from that posed by Giffen goods. The Giffen goods
theory is one for which observed demand rises as price rises, but the effect
arises without any interaction between price and preference—it results from
the interplay of the "income effect" and the "substitution effect" of a change
in price. Recent research has begun to examine the empirical evidence for the
existence of goods which show these interaction effects. The "Yale Law Journal"
has published a broad overview. Studies have also found evidence suggesting
people receive more pleasure from more expensive goods.
