Velocity of money The velocity of money (also called velocity of circulation
and, much earlier, currency) is the average frequency with which a unit of
money is spent on new goods and services produced domestically in a specific
period of time. Velocity has to do with the amount of economic activity
associated with a given money supply. When the period is understood, the
velocity may be presented as a pure number; otherwise it should be given as a
pure number over time. Illustration. If, for example, in a very small economy,
a farmer and a mechanic, with just $50 between them, buy new goods and services
from each other in just three transactions over the course of a year then $100
changed hands in the course of a year, even though there is only $50 in this
little economy. That $100 level is possible because each dollar was spent on
new goods and services an average of twice a year, which is to say that the
velocity was formula_1. Note that if the farmer bought a used tractor from the
mechanic or made a gift to the mechanic, it would not go into the numerator of
velocity because that transaction would not be part of this tiny economy's
gross domestic product. Indirect measurement. where Values of formula_6 and
formula_11 permit calculation of formula_12. where File:Velocity of M1 Money
Stock in the US.png|Velocity of M1 Money Stock in the US 1959–2012 File:
Velocity of M2 Money Stock in the US.png|Velocity of M2 Money Stock in the US
1959–2012 File:Velocity of MZM Money Stock in the US.png|Velocity of MZM
Money Stock in the US 1959–2012  Determination. The determinants and
consequent stability of the velocity of money are a subject of controversy
across and within schools of economic thought. Those favoring a quantity theory
of money have tended to believe that, in the absence of inflationary or
deflationary expectations, velocity will be technologically determined and
stable, and that such expectations will not generally arise without a signal
that overall prices have changed or will change. This view has been discredited
by the precipitous fall in velocity in the Japanese "Lost Decade" and the
worldwide "Great Recession" and its aftermath of 2008-10. Monetary authorities
undertook massive expansion of the money supplies, but instead of lifting
nominal GDP as predicted by this theory, velocity fell as nominal GDP was
relatively unchanged. Some people have incorrectly interpreted velocity to mean
the time between receipt of income and when it is spent. Note that how much
income is spent helps determine GDP, but when during a pay period it is spent
is immaterial. There could be a large volume of spending by people who waited a
long time between receiving income and spending it. They could store their
income in non-money forms, such as stocks and bonds, between receiving income
and spending it. So that notion of "how fast income is spent" is a fallacy.
Criticism. Henry Hazlitt criticized the concept of the velocity of money,
citing that the equation used to calculate it ignored the psychological effects
that also have a significant role in determining the value of a currency. As an
example, he shows that in a period of inflation, that when the money is newly
introduced, the price level increases by a smaller proportion than the increase
in the supply of money, but that when the money has been in circulation for a
while, that the price level has increased by a greater proportion than the
supply of money. He states that this is not due to a change in the velocity of
money, but rather the discrepancy is due to "fears . . . that the inflation
will continue into the future, and that the value of the monetary unit will
fall further." Hazlitt offers an alternative to the quantity theory of money
and the velocity of money concept that is a necessary consequence. He explains
that what changes the value of money is the value that people place on the
currency, and that it is not the velocity of money that determines the value of
a currency, but rather the sum of individuals' value of the currency that
determines the velocity of money. Ludwig von Mises offered a more philosophical
criticism, "The main deficiency of the velocity of circulation concept is that
it does not start from the actions of individuals but looks at the problem from
the angle of the whole economic system. This concept in itself is a vicious
mode of approaching the problem of prices and purchasing power. It is assumed
that, other things being equal, prices must change in proportion to the changes
occurring in the total supply of money available. This is not true."
