Virtue Virtue (, "arete") is moral excellence. A virtue is a positive trait or
quality deemed to be morally good and thus is valued as a foundation of
principle and good moral being. Personal virtues are characteristics valued as
promoting collective and individual greatness. The opposite of virtue is vice.
Classical antiquity. Platonic virtue. This enumeration is traced to Greek
philosophy and was listed by Plato in addition to piety: (hosiotēs). It is
likely that Plato believed that virtue was, in fact, a single thing, and that
this enumeration was created by others in order to better define virtue. In
"Protagoras" and "Meno", he states that the separate virtues can't exist
independently and offers as evidence the contradictions of acting with wisdom
(prudence), yet in an unjust way, or acting with bravery (fortitude), yet
without knowing (prudence). Aristotelian virtue. In his work "Nicomachean
Ethics", Aristotle defined a virtue as a balance point between a deficiency and
an excess of a trait. The point of greatest virtue lies not in the exact
middle, but at a golden mean sometimes closer to one extreme than the other.
For example, courage is the mean between cowardice and foolhardiness,
confidence the mean between self-deprecation and vanity, and generosity the
mean between miserliness and extravagance. To find the golden mean requires
common-sense smarts, not necessarily high intelligence. In Aristotle's sense,
virtue is excellence at being human, a skill that helps a person survive,
thrive, form meaningful relationships, and find happiness. Learning virtue is
usually difficult at first, but becomes easier with practice over time until it
becomes a habit. Prudence and virtue. Seneca, the Roman Stoic, said that
perfect prudence is indistinguishable from perfect virtue. Thus, in considering
all consequences, a prudent person would act in the same way as a virtuous
person. The same rationale was expressed by Plato in Meno, when he wrote that
people only act in ways that they perceive will bring them maximum good. It is
the lack of wisdom that results in the making of a bad choice instead of a
prudent one. In this way, wisdom is the central part of virtue. Plato realized
that if virtue was synonymous with wisdom then it could be taught, a
possibility he had earlier discounted. He then added "correct belief" as an
alternative to knowledge, proposing that knowledge is merely correct belief
that has been thought through and "tethered". Jewish tradition. Loving God, and
obeying his laws, in particular the Ten Commandments are central to Jewish
conceptions of virtue. Wisdom is also celebrated in the Book of Wisdom. A
classic articulation of the Golden Rule came from the first century Rabbi
Hillel the Elder. Renowned in the Jewish tradition as a sage and a scholar, he
is associated with the development of the Mishnah and the Talmud and, as such,
one of the most important figures in Jewish history. Asked for a summary of the
Jewish religion in the most concise terms, Hillel replied (reputedly while
standing on one leg): "That which is hateful to you, do not do to your fellow.
That is the whole Torah. The rest is the explanation; go and learn." Christian
tradition. In Christianity, the three theological virtues are Faith, Hope and
Love, a list which comes from 1 Corinthians 13:13 (νυνι δε μενει
"πιστις ελπις αγαπη" τα τρια ταυτα μειζων δε
τουτων η αγαπη ("pistis, elpis, agape"). The same chapter describes
love as the greatest of the three, and further defines love as "patient, kind,
not envious, boastful, arrogant, or rude." (The Christian virtue of love is
sometimes called charity and at other times a Greek word agape is used to
contrast the love for God and humankind from other types of love such as
friendship or physical affection.) "These are not acquired through human effort
but, beginning with Baptism, they are infused within us as gifts from God."-
United States Catholic Catechism for Adults. There are many listings of virtue
additional to the traditional Christian virtues (faith, hope and love) in the
Christian Bible. One is the "Fruit of the Holy Spirit," found in Galatians 5:
22-23: "By contrast, the fruits of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, patience,
kindness, generosity, faithfulness, gentleness, and self-control. There is no
law against such things." (Ὁ δὲ καρπὸς τοῦ πνεύματός
ἐστιν ἀγάπη χαρὰ εἰρήνη, μακροθυμία
χρηστότης ἀγαθωσύνη, πίστις πραΰτης
ἐγκράτεια· κατὰ τῶν τοιούτων οὐκ ἔστιν
νόμος.) Christianity. The substance that acts on faith, capable of
manifesting miracles. Virtue, as a measurable, spiritually-able substance, as
defined by Christ Jesus; recorded by the apostle Mark. According to the King
James version of the Holy Bible, from within The book of Mark, Chapter (5),
verses (25) through (33) by experiential definition. 25. And a certain woman,
which had an issue of blood twelve years, 26. And had suffered many things of
many physicians, and had spent all that she had, and was nothing bettered, but
rather grew worse, 27 When she had heard of Jesus, came in the press behind,
and touched his garment. 28 For she said, If I may touch but his clothes, I
shall be whole. 29 And straightway the fountain of her blood was dried up; and
she felt in her body that she was healed of that plague. 30 And Jesus,
immediately knowing in himself that virtue had gone out of him, turned him
about in the press, and said, Who touched my clothes? 31 And his disciples said
unto him, Thou seest the multitude thronging thee, and sayest thou, Who touched
me? 32 And he looked round about to see her that had done this thing. 33 But
the woman fearing and trembling, knowing what was done in her, came and fell
down before him, and told him all the truth. Arguably paralleled: As Faith is
the substance of things hoped for; the evidence of things not seen, according
to The Book of Hebrews 11:1-3, as quoted from the King James version of the
Holy Bible. 1. Now faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of
things not seen. 2 For by it the elders obtained a good report. 3 Through faith
we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God, so that things
which are seen were not made of things which do appear. By these 2 examples set
apart, one is made better aware of the necessity of a greater understanding, of
the potential of virtue, as it is paralleled here by both; in "substance,'
'actions' and by the 'Person" of Christ Jesus or The Living Word of God, that
each doing their own parts and/or in parallel, act on faith, with virtue and
according to Biblical reference, are able to manifest miracles, by the Word of
God. Egyptian / Khemetic Tradition. Maat or ma'at (thought to have been
pronounced *[muʔ.ʕat]), also spelled māt or mayet, was the ancient Egyptian
concept of truth, balance, order, law, morality, and justice. Maat was also
personified as a goddess regulating the stars, seasons, and the actions of both
mortals and the deities, who set the order of the universe from chaos at the
moment of creation. Her (ideological) counterpart was Isfet. Muslim tradition.
In Muslim tradition, the Qur'an, is believed to be the literal word of God, and
the definitive description of virtue. The Prophet Muhammad, as the messenger of
God, is considered the best example of Islamic virtues in human form. The
hadiths - reported sayings of Muhammad - are thus also central to the Islamic
understanding of virtue. Islamic virtues include: righteousness, generosity,
gratitude, contentment, humility, kindness, courtesy, purity, good speech,
respect, wisdom, tolerance, justice, mercy, dignity, courage, firmness,
frankness, hope, patience, perseverance, discipline, self-restraint, balance/
moderation, prudence, unity, frugality, sincerity, responsibility, loyalty,
trustworthiness, honesty/fair-dealing, repentance and spirituality. Bahá'í
tradition. In the Bahá'í Faith, virtues are direct spiritual qualities that
the human soul possesses, inherited from God Himself. The development and
manifestation of these virtues is the theme of the "Hidden Words" of
Bahá'u'lláh and are discussed in great detail as the underpinnings of a
divinely-inspired society by `Abdu'l-Bahá in such texts as "The Secret of
Divine Civilization". The Virtues Project developed by Canadian Bahá'ís Linda
Popov, Dan Popov, and John Kavelin, is greatly inspired by the Bahá'í
perspective on virtues. Hindu virtues. Hinduism, or Sanatana Dharma (Dharma
means moral duty), has pivotal virtues that everyone keeping their Dharma is
asked to follow, for they are distinct qualities of manusya (mankind) that
allow one to be in the mode of goodness. There are three modes of material
nature (guna), as described in the Vedas and other Indian Scriptures: Sattva
(goodness,maintenance, stillness, intelligence), Rajas (passion, creation,
energy, activity), and Tamas (ignorance, restraint, inertia, destruction).
Every person harbours a mixture of these modes in varying degrees. A person in
the mode of Sattva has that mode in prominence in his nature, which he obtains
by following the virtues of the Dharma. The modes of Sattva are as follows:
Buddhist tradition. Buddhist practice as outlined in the Noble Eightfold Path
can be regarded as a progressive list of virtues. There are also the Paramitas
("perfections"). In Chinese philosophy. "Virtue", translated from Chinese "de"
(), is also an important concept in Chinese philosophy, particularly Daoism.
"De" () originally meant normative "virtue" in the sense of "personal
character; inner strength; integrity", but semantically changed to moral
"virtue; kindness; morality". Note the semantic parallel for English "", with
an archaic meaning of "inner potency; divine power" (as in "by virtue of") and
a modern one of "moral excellence; goodness". Confucian moral manifestations of
"virtue" include "ren" ("humanity"), "xiao" ("filial piety"), and "li" ("proper
behavior, performance of rituals"). In Confucianism, the notion of ren -
according to Simon Leys - means "humanity" and "goodness". Ren originally had
the archaic meaning in the Confucian Book of Poems of "virility", but
progressively took on shades of ethical meaning. (On the origins and
transformations of this concept see Lin Yu-sheng: "The evolution of the pre-
Confucian meaning of jen and the Confucian concept of moral autonomy,"
Monumenta Serica, vol.31, 1974-75.) The Daoist concept of "De", however, is
more subtle, pertaining to the "virtue" or ability that an individual realizes
by following the Dao ("the Way"). One important normative value in much of
Chinese thinking is that one's social status should result from the amount of
virtue that one demonstrates, rather than from one's birth. In the "Analects",
Confucius explains "de" as follows: "He who exercises government by means of
his virtue may be compared to the north polar star, which keeps its place and
all the stars turn towards it." Samurai virtue. If one dedicates these four
vows to the gods and Buddhas every morning, he will have the strength of two
men and never slip backward. One must edge forward like the inchworm, bit by
bit. The gods and Buddhas, too, first started with a vow. Virtues according to
Benjamin Franklin. These are the virtues that Benjamin Franklin used to develop
what he called 'moral perfection'. He had a checklist in a notebook to measure
each day how he lived up to his virtues. They became known through Benjamin
Franklin's autobiography. Kantian virtue. Immanuel Kant, in his "Observations
on the Feeling of the Beautiful and Sublime", expresses true virtue as
different from what commonly is known about this moral trait. In Kant's view,
to be goodhearted, benevolent and sympathetic is not regarded as true virtue.
The only aspect that makes a human truly virtuous is to behave in accordance
with moral principles. Kant presents an example for more clarification; suppose
that you come across a needy person in the street; if your sympathy leads you
to help that person, your response does not illustrate your virtue. In this
example, since you do not afford helping all needy ones, you have behaved
unjustly, and it is out of the domain of principles and true virtue. Kant
applies the approach of four temperaments to distinguish truly virtuous people.
According to Kant, among all people with diverse temperaments, a person with
melancholy frame of mind is the most virtuous whose thoughts, words and deeds
are on the bases of principles. Virtues as emotions. Marc Jackson in his book
"Emotion and Psyche" puts forward a new development of the virtues. He
identifies the virtues as what he calls the good emotions "The first group
consisting of love, kindness, joy, faith, awe and pity is good" These virtues
differ from older accounts of the virtues because they are not character traits
expressed by action, but emotions that are to be felt and developed by feeling
not acting. In Objectivism. Ayn Rand held that in her morality, the , is
contained in a single axiom: existence exists, and a single choice: to live.
All values and virtues proceed from these. To live, man must hold three
fundamental values that one develops and achieves in life: Reason, Purpose, and
Self-Esteem. A value is "that which one acts to gain and/or keep ... and the
virtue[are the act by which one gains and/or keeps it." The primary virtue in
Objectivist ethics is rationality, which as Rand meant it is "the recognition
and acceptance of reason as one's only source of knowledge, one's only judge of
values and one's only guide to action." These values are achieved by passionate
and consistent action and the virtues are the policies for achieving those
fundamental values. Ayn Rand describes seven virtues: rationality,
productiveness, pride, independence, integrity, honesty and justice. The first
three represent the three primary virtues that correspond to the three
fundamental values, whereas the final four are derived from the virtue of
rationality. She claims that virtue is not an end in itself, that virtue is not
its own reward nor sacrificial fodder for the reward of evil, that life is the
reward of virtue and happiness is the goal and the reward of life. Man has a
single basic choice: to think or not, and that is the gauge of his virtue.
Moral perfection is an unbreached rationality, not the degree of your
intelligence but the full and relentless use of your mind, not the extent of
your knowledge but the acceptance of reason as an absolute. In modern
psychology. Christopher Peterson and Martin Seligman, two leading researchers
in positive psychology, recognizing the deficiency inherent in psychology's
tendency to focus on dysfunction rather than on what makes a healthy and stable
, set out to develop a list of "Character Strengths and Virtues". After three
years of study, 24 traits (classified into six broad areas of virtue) were
identified, having "a surprising amount of similarity across cultures and
strongly indicat a historical and cross-cultural convergence." These six
categories of virtue are courage, justice, humanity, temperance, transcendence,
and wisdom. Some psychologists suggest that these virtues are adequately
grouped into fewer categories; for example, the same 24 traits have been
grouped into simply: Cognitive Strengths, Temperance Strengths, and Social
Strengths. Vice as opposite. The opposite of a virtue is a vice. Vice is a
habitual, repeated practice of wrongdoing. One way of organizing the vices is
as the corruption of the virtues. As Aristotle noted, however, the virtues can
have several opposites. Virtues can be considered the mean between two
extremes, as the Latin maxim dictates "in medio stat virtus" - in the centre
lies virtue. For instance, both cowardice and rashness are opposites of
courage; contrary to prudence are both over-caution and insufficient caution;
the opposites of humility are shame and pride. A more "modern" virtue,
tolerance, can be considered the mean between the two extremes of narrow-
mindedness on the one hand and over-acceptance on the other. Vices can
therefore be identified as the opposites of virtues - but with the caveat that
each virtue could have many different opposites, all distinct from each other.
