Virtuous circle and vicious circle A virtuous circle and a vicious circle (also
referred to as virtuous cycle and vicious cycle) are economic terms. They refer
to a complex chain of events that reinforces itself through a feedback loop. A
"virtuous" circle has favorable results, while a "vicious" circle has
detrimental results. Both circles are complexes of events with no tendency
towards equilibrium (at least in the short run). Both systems of events have
feedback loops in which each iteration of the cycle reinforces the previous one
(positive feedback). These cycles will continue in the direction of their
momentum until an external factor intervenes and breaks the cycle. The prefix
"hyper-" is sometimes used to describe these cycles if they are extreme. The
best-known example of a vicious circle is hyperinflation. Example in
macroeconomics. Virtuous circle. Economic growth can be seen as a virtuous
circle. It might start with an exogenous, or outside factor such as
technological innovation. As people get familiar with the new technology, there
could be learning curve effects and economies of scale. This could lead to
reduced costs and improved production efficiencies. In a competitive market
structure, this will probably result in lower average prices. As prices
decrease, consumption could increase and aggregate output also. Increased
levels of output lead to more learning and scale effects and a new cycle
starts. Vicious circle. Hyperinflation is a spiral of inflation which causes
even higher inflation. The initial exogenous event might be a sudden large
increase in international interest rates or a massive increase in government
debt due to excessive spendings. Whatever the cause, the government could pay
down some of its debt by printing more money (called monetizing the debt). This
increase in the money supply could increase the level of inflation. In an
inflationary environment, people tend to spend their money quickly because they
expect its value to decrease further in the future. They convert their
financial assets into physical assets while their money still has some
purchasing power. Often they will purchase on credit. Eventually, the currency
loses all of its value. Because of this, the level of savings in the country is
very low and the government could have problems refinancing its debt. Its
solution could be to print still more money starting another iteration of the
vicious cycle. Example in management. Virtuous circle. An employer's investment
in his employees’ ability to provide superior service to customers can be
seen as a virtuous circle. Effort spent in selecting and training employees and
creating a corporate culture in which they are empowered can lead to increased
employee satisfaction and employee competence. This can result in superior
service delivery and customer satisfaction. This in turn will create customer
loyalty, improved sales levels, and higher profit margins. Some of these
profits can be reinvested in employee development, thereby initiating another
iteration of a virtuous cycle. Vicious circle. A harvesting strategy which can
be an example of a vicious circle is rather than reinvesting in employee
development, new product development, and market research, management could
decide to harvest its investment by reducing costs then increasing dividends or
increasing executive compensation. The consequence of this could be reduced
employee wages, minimal training, an outdated product line, and a failure to
understand the needs of the customer. This will probably result in employee
dissatisfaction, employee incompetence, and high employee turnover. This could
cause poor service delivery, customer dissatisfaction, high customer turnover,
and loss of market share. Reduced sales and lower profit margins may require a
further reduction in investment, thereby initiating another iteration of the
vicious circle. Vicious circles in the subprime mortgage crisis. The
contemporary subprime mortgage crisis is a complex of vicious circles, both in
its genesis and in its manifold outcomes, most notably the late 2000s
recession. A specific example is the circle related to housing. As housing
prices decline, more homeowners go "underwater", when the market value of a
home drops below the mortgage on it. This provides an incentive to walk away
from the home, increasing defaults and foreclosures. This, in turn, lowers
housing values further, reinforcing the cycle. The foreclosures reduce the cash
flowing into banks and the value of mortgage-backed securities (MBS) widely
held by banks. Banks incur losses and require additional funds, also called
“recapitalization”. If banks are not capitalized sufficiently to lend,
economic activity slows and unemployment increases, which further increase the
number of foreclosures. Economist Nouriel Roubini described the vicious circles
within and across the housing market and financial markets during interviews
with Charlie Rose in September and October 2008. Other examples. Other examples
include the poverty cycle, sharecropping, and the intensification of drought.
In climate change science, feedback loops involve positive feedbacks and
negative feedbacks that respectively serve to intensify or dampen the effects
of global warming.
