Vote counting system There exist various methods through which the ballots cast
at an election may be counted, prior to applying a voting system to obtain one
or more winners. Manual counting. Manual counting requires a physical ballot
that represents voter intent. The physical ballots are read and interpreted;
then results are individually tabulated. This method is used in Sweden for
example, and conducted as follows. The voter casts three ballots, one for each
of the three elections (national, regional, and local), each in a sealed
envelope. The party and candidate names are pre-printed on the ballot, or the
voter can write them in on a blank ballot. When voting has finished, all
envelopes are opened on the counting table, for one election at a time. They
are sorted in piles according to party, inspecting them for validity. The piles
are then counted manually, while witnesses around the table observe. The count
is recorded, and the same pile is counted again. If the results do not agree,
it is counted a third time. When all piles are counted and the results agree,
the result is certified and transmitted for central tabulation. The count as
received is made public, to allow anyone to double-check the tabulation and
audit the raw data. There appears to be a high level of confidence in this
system among the population, as evidenced by the lack of criticism of it. Such
a system may be used for recounts in areas where mechanical or automated
counting systems are used. Electromechanical and Optical scan counting. Paper
ballots, typically punched cards or marksense, are collected and fed into a
machine to tabulate vote totals. Tabulation can occur with each individual
ballot, or in batches. Direct-recording voting (mechanical) counting. Voters
selecting switches (levers), pushing plastic chips through holes, or pushing
mechanical buttons which increment a mechanical counter (sometimes called the
odometer) for the appropriate candidate. Direct-recording electronic counting.
Voting data and ballot images are recorded in memory components. Tabulation of
the voting data stored in a removable memory component and as printed copy. The
system may also provide a means for transmitting individual ballots or vote
totals to a central location for consolidating and reporting results from
precincts at the central location. This consolidation can be any subset of
machines, such as all voting machines in a polling station, or all voting
machines in a precinct, etc. References.
lass>
