Voter database A voter database is a database containing information on voters
for the purpose of assisting a political party or an individual politician, in
their Get out the vote (GOTV) efforts and other areas of the campaign. In most
countries, the election agency makes the electoral roll available to all
campaigns soon after the election campaign has begun. Campaigns can then merge
this information with the other data they have collected on voters over the
years to create their database. Often basic information such as phone numbers
and postal codes are not included on the voters list, and the campaign will
have to procure this data as well. The United States has no state or federal
election agency, and thus no central lists. In 2002, the United States Congress
passed the Help America Vote Act (HAVA). HAVA required that each state compile
an official state voter database by January 2006. Most states complied with
HAVA by gathering the voter files available from each individual county. States
decided what information to include, what restrictions to place on the use of
their voter database, and how much the database would cost. In the United
States, several companies have merged state voter information with commercially
obtained data to create comprehensive voter databases that include a plethora
of personal details on each voter. These companies often provide United States
Voter Files to statutorily permitted or otherwise non-restricted users. Voter
database management software. In the United States. In the 2004 presidential
election in the United States, the Republican Party used the Voter Vault
platform and the Democratic Party used DataMart. Currently, the Republicans use
Voter Vault 3 and the Democrats use Votebuilder from the Voter Activation
Network (VAN). In the United Kingdom. In 2005, the British Conservative Party
used the Voter Vault software to assist them in the 2005 General Election.
Currently, the British Conservative Party uses MERLIN (Managing Elector
Relationships through Local Information Networks) which is a national database
accessible by every local Conservative Association in the country. This was
commissioned in 2005, and went live in 2008. Britain's Labour Party has used a
variety of voter databases through the past two decades. Its most recent
incarnation is the Labour Contact Creator system, an online tool accessible
from anywhere with an internet connection. Party members and activists are
provided with a username and password and voter contact details, preferences,
interests, past voting behaviour, and demographic/socio-economic information
are available. The system allows voters to be selected on the basis of a MOSAIC
grouping, which attempts to determine the sort of interests and activities a
voter or a household might display. Maps of where key voters live and
information can be cross-referenced so users can find where target voters live,
how often they are contacted, how they prefer to be contacted, and what
responses have been provided upon making contact. The Contact Creator system is
also linked with the Labour Party's other new media tools, Print Creator and
Email Creator. Print Creator allows key voters identified through Contact
Creator to be targeted with direct mails and leaflets about Labour Party
activity. Email Creator allows the user to collect a list of email addresses on
the Contact Creator system, e-mail thousands of voters, and monitor the
response rate from targets. The Labour Party also operates 'Membersnet', which
allows party members to update their registration details, inform other members
and Party HQ of rival campaign activities, create events and invite others to
attend, email members, create blogs, and share best practice campaign material.
The Labour Party is just about to introduce a new system to Membersnet and
Contact Creator, which will allow Party Members anywhere in the UK to contact
target voters and identify their voting preferences. They will then be able to
enter the information gained directly into the Contact Creator system.
Currently the Liberal Democrats have recently adopted the use of "Connect" from
the same company as "NGP VAN". This firm also supplies the Democrats in the USA
with "Votebuilder" and "Liberal List" on behalf of the Liberal Party in Canada.
In Canada. In Canada, the Conservative Party of Canada uses the Constituent
Information Management System (CIMS), originally developed by the same company
which produced Trackright, which the Progressive Conservative Party of Ontario,
uses to manage voter information. It is similar to the Voter Vault software.
The New Democratic Party uses their own custom database system called NDP Vote.
The Liberal Party has recently introduced "Liberalist" based on the US's
Democrats' Voter Activation Network (VAN) Previously the Liberals used a system
called ManagElect
