Voting machine Voting machines are the total combination of mechanical,
electromechanical, or electronic equipment (including software, firmware, and
documentation required to program control, and support equipment), that is used
to define ballots; to cast and count votes; to report or display election
results; and to maintain and produce any audit trail information. The first
voting machines were mechanical but it is increasingly more common to use
electronic voting machines. A voting system includes the practices and
associated documentation used to identify system components and versions of
such components; to test the system during its development and maintenance; to
maintain records of system errors or defects; to determine specific changes
made after initial certification; and to make available any materials to the
voter (such as notices, instructions, forms, or paper ballots). Traditionally,
a voting machine has been defined by the mechanism the system uses to cast
votes and further categorized by the location where the system tabulates the
votes. Voting machines have different levels of usability, security, efficiency
and accuracy. Certain systems may be more or less accessible to all voters, or
not accessible to those voters with certain types of disabilities. They can
also have an effect on the public's ability to oversee elections. Early
history. The first major proposal for the use of voting machines came from the
Chartists in 1838. Among the radical reforms called for in "The People's
Charter" were universal suffrage and voting by secret ballot. This required
major changes in the conduct of elections, and as responsible reformers, the
Chartists not only demanded reforms but described how to accomplish them,
publishing "Schedule A", a description of how to run a polling place, and
"Schedule B", a description of a voting machine to be used in such a polling
place. The Chartist voting machine, attributed to Benjamin Jolly of 19 York
Street in Bath, allowed each voter to cast one vote in a single race. This
matched the requirements of a British parliamentary election. Each voter was to
cast his vote by dropping a brass ball into the appropriate hole in the top of
the machine by the candidate's name. Each voter could only vote once because
each voter was given just one brass ball. The ball advanced a clockwork counter
for the corresponding candidate as it passed through the machine, and then fell
out the front where it could be given to the next voter. In 1875, Henry Spratt
of Kent received a U.S. patent for a voting machine that presented the ballot
as an array of push buttons, one per candidate. Spratt's machine was typically
British, allowing each voter to cast a fixed number of votes in a single race.
In 1881, Anthony Beranek of Chicago patented the first voting machine
appropriate for use in a general election in the United States. Beranek's
machine presented an array of push buttons to the voter, with one row per
office on the ballot, and one column per party. Interlocks behind each row
prevented voting for more than one candidate per race, and an interlock with
the door of the voting booth reset the machine for the next voter as each voter
left the booth. Vote-recording Technologies. Document-based Ballot Voting
Systems. A document ballot voting system records votes, counts votes, and
produces a tabulation of the vote count from votes cast on paper cards or
sheets. A document ballot voting system can allow for manual or electronic
tabulation. Manually marked and Tabulated Paper Ballots. The first use of paper
ballots to conduct an election appears to have been in Rome in 139 BCE, and the
first use of paper ballots in the United States was in 1629 to select a pastor
for the Salem Church. Punched Card. Punched card systems employ a card (or
cards) and a small clipboard-sized device for recording votes. Voters punch
holes in the cards (with a supplied punch device) opposite their candidate or
ballot issue choice. After voting, the voter may place the ballot in a ballot
box, or the ballot may be fed into a computer vote tabulating device at the
precinct. The idea of voting by punching holes on paper or cards originated in
the 1890s and inventors continued to explore this in the years that followed.
The first major success for punched-card voting came in 1965, with Joseph P.
Harris' development of the Votomatic punched-card system. This was based on
IBM's Port-A-Punch technology. Harris licenced the Votomatic to IBM William
Rouverol built the prototype system. The Votomatic system was very successful.
By the 1996 Presidential election, some variation of the punched card system
was used by 37.3% of registered voters in the United States. Votomatic style
systems and punched cards received considerable notoriety in 2000 when their
uneven use in Florida was alleged to have affected the outcome of the U.S.
presidential election. Optical Scan (Marksense). An optical scan, or marksense,
voting system allows a voter to record votes by making marks directly on the
ballot, usually in voting response locations. Using Electronic Input Device. A
paper-based system may allow for the voter's selections to be indicated by
marks made on a paper ballot by an electronic input device. Voter Verified
Paper Audit Trail. Some traditionally non-document ballot voting systems may
print a Voter Verified Paper Audit Trail (VVPAT) to serve as a document
(ballot) for each vote. Electronic Ballot Marker. The Electronic Ballot Marker
(EBM) is categorized as any such input device that does not independently
record, store, or tabulate the voter selections. Non-document-based Ballot
Voting Systems. Direct-recording Voting System. Commonly used in the United
States until the 1990s (and commonly known as lever machines), direct recording
voting systems are mechanical systems to tabulate votes. This was the first
voting technology commercialized in the United States. In 1889, Jacob Myers of
Rochester, New York received a patent for a voting machine that was based on
Beranek's 1881 machine. This machine saw its first use in Lockport, New York,
in 1892. In 1894, Sylvanus Davis added a straight-party lever and significantly
simplified the interlocking mechanism used to enforce the vote-for-one rule in
each race. By 1899, Alfred Gillespie introduced several refinements. It was
Gillespie who replaced the heavy metal voting booth with a curtain that was
linked to the cast-vote lever, and Gillespie introduced the lever by each
candidate name that was turned to point to that name in order to cast a vote
for that candidate. Inside the machine, Gillespie worked out how to make the
machine programmable so that it could support races in which voters were
allowed to vote for, for example, 3 out of 5 candidates. On Dec. 14, 1900, the
U.S. Standard Voting Machine Company was formed, with Alfred Gillespie as one
of its directors, to combine the companies that held the Myers, Davis, and
Gillespie patents. By the 1920s, this company (under various names) had a
monopoly on voting machines, until, in 1936, Samuel and Ransom Shoup obtained a
patent for a competing voting machine. By 1934, about 1/6 of all presidential
ballots were being cast on mechanical voting machines, essentially all made by
the same manufacturer. Commonly, a voter enters the machine and pulls a lever
to close the curtain, thus unlocking the voting levers. The voter then makes
his or her selection from a list of switches denoting the appropriate
candidates or measures. The machine is configured to prevent overvotes by
locking out other candidates when one candidate's switch is flipped. When the
voter is finished, a lever is pulled which opens the curtain and increments the
appropriate counters for each candidate and measure. The results are then hand
written by the precinct officer at the conclusion of voting. New York is the
last state to stop using these machines. Direct-recording Electronic Voting
System. The successor to direct recording voting machines, a direct-recording
electronic (DRE) voting system records votes by means of an electronic display
provided with mechanical or electro-optical components that can be activated by
the voter; that processes voter selections by means of a computer program; and
that records that processed voting data in memory components. It produces a
tabulation of the voting data that is stored in a removable memory component
and may also provide printed renditions of the data. The system may further
provide a means for transmitting the processed vote data to a central location
in individual or accumulated forms for consolidating and reporting results from
precincts at a central location. DRE systems additionally can produce a paper
ballot printout that can be verified by the voter before they cast their
ballot. Public Network Direct-recording Electronic Voting System. A public
network DRE voting system is an election system that uses electronic ballots
and transmits vote data from the polling place to another location over a
public network. Vote data may be transmitted as individual ballots as they are
cast, periodically as batches of ballots throughout the election day, or as one
batch at the close of voting. Vote-tabulation Technologies. Most voting systems
(whether document ballot or non-document ballot) can be tabulated either at the
place of voting or in another location. In this case ""precinct"" is the place
of voting. Precinct-count Voting System. A precinct-count voting system is a
voting system that tabulates ballots at the polling place. Generally, systems
that hand count the ballots will tabulate the ballots only after the close of
polling. Other voting systems typically tabulate the ballots as they are cast.
In all systems, the vote totals are made public only after the close of
polling. For DREs and some paper-based systems these systems provide electronic
storage of the vote count and may transmit results to a central location over
public telecommunication networks. This system allows for voters to be notified
of voting errors such as over voting and can prevent residual votes. Central-
count Voting System. A central count voting system is a voting system that
tabulates ballots from multiple precincts at a central location. Voted ballots
are typically placed into secure storage at the polling place. Stored ballots
are transported or transmitted to a central counting location. The system
produces a printed report of the vote count, and may produce a report stored on
electronic media. See also. People
