Wage labour Wage labour (or wage labor) is the socioeconomic relationship
between a worker and an employer, where the worker sells their labour under a
formal or informal employment contract. These transactions usually occur in a
labour market where wages are market determined. In exchange for the wages
paid, the work product generally becomes the undifferentiated property of the
employer, except for special cases such as the vesting of intellectual property
patents in the United States where patent rights are usually vested in the
original personal inventor. A wage labourer is a person whose primary means of
income is from the selling of his or her labour in this way. In modern mixed
economies such as those of the OECD countries, it is currently the dominant
form of work arrangement. Although most work occurs following this structure,
the wage work arrangements of CEOs, professional employees, and professional
contract workers are sometimes conflated with class assignments, so that "wage
labour" is considered to apply only to unskilled, semi-skilled or manual
labour. Criticisms. The first point of criticism is on the freedom of the
worker. Wage-labour societies emerged from removing the alternative means of
self-sustainment used previously by peasants. Historically, whenever people had
their own land to cultivate—as was the case for most of the population in
pre-industrial England, colonial Kenya, colonial Australia, or colonial
Namibia—they did not commit to work for an employer. In such cases, laws were
promulgated to expel peasants from their lands, and to make the price of the
land artificially high so that a common person would have to work an entire
lifetime to buy it. The second point of criticism is that after people have
been compelled by economic necessity to no feasible alternative than that of
wage labour, exploitation occurs; thus the claim that wage labor is "voluntary"
on the part of the labourer is considered a red herring as the relationship is
only entered into due to systemic coercion brought about by the inequality of
bargaining power between labor and capital as classes. Wage labour is often
criticized as "wage slavery" by socialists and most anarchists. They see wage
labour as a major, if not defining, aspect of hierarchical industrial systems.
In Marxist terminology, wage labour is defined as "the mode of production where
the worker sells their labour power as a commodity", and a wage labourer is one
who sells their labour power. Some opponents of capitalism compare wage labour
to slavery (see wage slavery). For example, Karl Marx said ""The slave,
together with his labour-power, was sold to his owner once for all... The
labourer, on the other hand, sells his very self, and that by fractions... He
[belongs to the capitalist class; and it is for him... to find a buyer in this
capitalist class."" While most opponents of wage labor blame the capitalist
owners of the means of production for its existence, most anarchists and
libertarian socialists also hold the state as equally responsible as it exists
as a tool utilized by capitalists to subsidize themselves and protect the
institution of private ownership of the means of production—which guarantees
the concentration of capital among a wealthy elite leaving the majority of the
population without access. As some opponents of wage labor take influence from
Marxist propositions, many are opposed to private property, but maintain
respect for personal property. Most opponents of the institution support worker
self-management and economic democracy as alternatives to both wage-labor and
to capitalism.
