Washington and Lee University Washington and Lee University (informally called
Washington and Lee or W&L) is a private liberal arts university in Lexington,
Virginia, United States. The classical school from which Washington and Lee
descended was established in 1749 as Augusta Academy, about north of its
present location. In 1776 it was renamed Liberty Hall in a burst of
revolutionary fervor. The academy moved to Lexington in 1780, when it was
chartered as Liberty Hall Academy, and built its first facility near town in
1782. In 1796, George Washington endowed the academy with the largest gift ever
given to an educational institution at that time: $20,000 in stock. The gift
rescued Liberty Hall from near-certain insolvency. In gratitude, the trustees
changed the school's name to Washington Academy; in 1813 it was chartered as
Washington College. Dividends from Washington's gift continue to help pay part
of the cost of each student's education. Robert E. Lee was its president after
the Civil War in 1865 until his death in 1870. The school was renamed
Washington and Lee University and its motto, Nōn Incautus Futūrī', meaning
""Not unmindful of the future"," is an adaptation of the Lee family motto. The
University consists of three academic units: The College; the Williams School
of Commerce, Economics, and Politics; and the School of Law History. Liberty
Hall Academy became a college when it granted its first bachelor of arts degree
in 1785, making it the ninth oldest institution of higher education in the
country. George Washington gave the school its first significant endowment in
1796, $20,000, at the time the largest gift ever given to an educational
institution in the United States, and Washington's gift continues to provide
nearly $1.87 a year toward every student's tuition. Trustees changed the name
of the school to Washington Academy, and later Washington College, to honor
him. Among many alumni who have followed in Washington's footsteps by donating
generously, Rupert Johnson, Jr., a 1962 graduate who is vice chairman of the
$600-billion Franklin Templeton investment management firm, gave $100 million
to Washington and Lee in June 2007, establishing a merit-based financial aid
and curriculum enrichment program. Liberty Hall is said to have admitted its
first African-American student when John Chavis, a free black, enrolled in
1795. Chavis accomplished much in his life including fighting in the American
Revolution, studying at both Liberty Hall and the College of New Jersey (now
Princeton University), becoming an ordained Presbyterian minister, and opening
a school that instructed white and poor black students in North Carolina. He is
believed to be the first black student to enroll in higher education in the
United States, although he did not receive a degree. Washington and Lee
enrolled its next African-American student in 1966 in the law school. The
campus took its current architectural form in the 1820s when a local merchant,
"Jockey" John Robinson, an uneducated Irish immigrant, donated funds to build a
central building. For the dedication celebration in 1824, Robinson supplied a
huge barrel of whiskey, which he intended for the dignitaries in attendance.
But according to a contemporary history, the rabble broke through the barriers
and created pandemonium, which ended only when college officials demolished the
whiskey barrel with an ax. A justice of the Virginia State Supreme Court,
Christian Compton ('50 undergraduate, '53 law), re-created the episode in 1976
for the dedication of the new law school by having several barrels of Scotch
imported (without the unfortunate dénouement). The Lee years. After the
American Civil War, General Robert E. Lee turned down several financially
tantalizing offers of employment that would merely have traded on his name, and
instead accepted the post of college president for three reasons. First, he had
been superintendent of West Point, so higher education was in his background.
Second, and more important, he believed that it was a position in which he
could actually make a contribution to the reconciliation of the nation. Third,
the Washington family were his in-laws: his wife was the great-granddaughter of
Martha Washington. Lee had long looked on George Washington as a hero and role
model, so it is hardly surprising that he welcomed the challenge of leading a
college endowed by and named after the first president. Arguably Lee's finest
achievement was transforming a small, not particularly distinguished Latin
academy into a forward-looking institution of higher education ("not unmindful
of the future"). He established the first journalism courses (which didn't last
long, if offered at all), and he added both a business school and a law school
to the college curriculum, under the conviction that those occupations should
be intimately and inextricably linked with the liberal arts. That was a radical
idea: Journalism and law had always been considered technical crafts, not
intellectual endeavors, and business was even worse. Yet Lee's concept has
become universally accepted, and today it would seem subversive if anyone
suggested that education in journalism, business, and law should be kept
separate from the liberal arts and sciences. Lee was also the father of an
Honor System and a speaking tradition at Washington College that continue to
the present time. And, ardent about restoring national unity, he successfully
recruited students from the North as well as the South. Lee died on October 12,
1870, after just five years as Washington College president. The school's name
was almost immediately changed to link his with Washington's. His son, George
Washington Custis Lee, followed as the school's next president. General Lee and
much of his family - including his wife, his seven children, and his father,
the Revolutionary War hero "Light Horse Harry" Lee - are buried in the Lee
Chapel on campus, which faces the main row of antebellum college buildings.
Robert E. Lee's beloved horse, Traveller, is buried outside, near the wall of
the Chapel. Campus. The row of brick buildings that form the Colonnade, which
traces to 1824, is a U.S. National Historic Landmark. Separately, the Lee
Chapel is also a National Historic Landmark. The British writer John Cowper
Powys once called W&L the "most beautiful college campus in America." The poet
and dramatist John Drinkwater remarked, "If this scene were set down in the
middle of Europe, the whole continent would flock to see it!" In recent years
the university has invested heavily in upgrading and expanding its academic,
residential, athletic, research, arts and extracurricular facilities. The new
facilities include an undergraduate library, gymnasium, art/music/theater
complex, dorms, student center, student activities pavilion and tennis
pavilion, as well as renovation of the journalism and commerce buildings and
renovation of every fraternity house and construction of several sorority
houses. Lewis Hall, the 30-year-old home of the law school, as well as athletic
fields and the antebellum Historic Front Campus buildings, are all currently
undergoing major renovation. In 1977, "The New Yorker" published a cartoon
showing a family in a car in front of the Washington and Lee campus. The
caption was: "The College of Your Choice". Organization and administration. The
school is governed by a Board of Trustees that has a maximum of 34 members.
Trustees are elected to four-year terms, and are allowed to serve a second-four
year term. Trustees shall be nominated by the Committee on Trusteeship and
elected by the Board. The Rector is the presiding officer of the Board of
Trustees and is a trustee elected by the board for a four-year term. The Board
meets in February, May, and October. The undergraduate calendar is an unusual
three-term system with 12-week fall and winter terms followed by a four-week
spring term. The spring-term courses include topical, often unique, seminars,
faculty-supervised study abroad, and some domestic and international
internships. The law calendar consists of the more traditional early-semester
system. Demographics. Washington and Lee was essentially all male until 1972,
when women were admitted to the law school; the first female undergraduates
enrolled in 1985. As of 2006, the University's undergraduate population was
equally divided between men and women. In 2006, the number of women receiving
undergraduate degrees exceeded the number of men for the first time in the
school's history. The law school population is more generally 40 percent women,
60 percent men. In 1795, the first known Black person was admitted to the
school, John Chavis, who became a teacher and Presbyterian minister. Walter
Blake and Carl Linwood Smothers become the first African-American students to
graduate from Washington and Lee University in 1972, the same year women were
first admitted. The University has worked to increase the number of minority
faculty and students. Minority students now comprise approximately 15 percent
of the student body. Honor system. Washington and Lee maintains a rigorous
honor system that traces directly to Robert E. Lee, who said, "We have but one
rule here, and it is that every student must be a gentleman." Students, upon
entering the university, vow to act honorably in all academic and nonacademic
endeavors. The Honor System is administered by students through the Executive
Committee of the Student Body (and has been since 1905). Any student found
guilty of an Honor Violation by his or her peers is subject to a single
sanction: expulsion. The Honor System is defined solely by students, and there
is an appeal process. Appeals are heard by juries composed of students drawn
randomly by the University Registrar. A formal assessment of the Honor System's
"White Book," occasionally including referenda, is held every three years to
review the tenets of the Honor System. Overwhelmingly, students continue to
support the Honor System and its single sanction, and they and alumni point to
the Honor System as one of the distinctive marks they carry with them from
their W&L experience. Washington and Lee's Honor System is distinct from others
such as those found at the neighboring Virginia Military Institute and the
University of Virginia because it is not codified. That is to say, unlike those
others, Washington and Lee's does not have a list of rules that define
punishable behavior—beyond the traditional guide of the offenses lying,
cheating or stealing. Exams at W&L are ordinarily unproctored and self-
scheduled. It is not unusual for professors to assign take-home, closed-book
finals with an explicit trust in their students not to cheat. The Honor System
is strongly enforced. In most years, only a few students withdraw in the face
of an honor charge or after investigations and closed hearings conducted by the
Executive Committee of the Student Body, the University's elected student
government (with the accused counseled by Honor Advocates, often law students).
In recent years, four or five students have left each year. Students found
guilty in a closed hearing may appeal the verdict to an open hearing before the
entire student body, although this option is rarely exercised. If found guilty
at an open trial, the student is dismissed from the university permanently.
Separately from the student-run honor system, the Student-Faculty Hearing Board
hears allegations of prohibited student discrimination, harassment, sexual
misconduct, and hazing by individuals and retaliation. Academics and
reputation. Today the university has about 2,000 undergraduate students and 400
in the School of Law. Both the undergraduate and law schools are near the top
of the "U.S. News and World Report" rankings for national liberal arts colleges
and law schools, respectively. In the 2013 guide, the undergraduate college is
ranked number 14 amongst national liberal arts colleges and the law school is
ranked number 24 nationally amongst all law schools. The 2012 Forbes Magazine
college rankings place W&L 15th, twenty one places ahead of nearby academic
rival University of Virginia. The admissions rate for the class of 2016 was 18
percent. "The average combined score on the math and verbal sections of the SAT
is 1,415 (of a possible 1,600). The average score on the ACT is 31." Washington
and Lee is divided into three schools: (1) The College, where all
undergraduates begin their studies, encompassing the liberal arts, humanities
and hard sciences, with notable interest among students in pre-health and pre-
law studies; (2) the Williams School of Commerce, Economics, and Politics,
which offers majors in accounting, business administration, economics,
politics, and public accounting; and (3) the School of Law, which offers Juris
Doctor and Master of Laws degrees. More than 1,100 undergraduate courses are
offered. There are no graduate or teaching assistants; every course is taught
by a faculty member. The university libraries contain has more than 700,000
volumes (and a vast electronic network). The law library has an additional
400,000 volumes as well as extensive electronic resources. Washington and Lee
offers 42 undergraduate majors (including interdisciplinary majors in
neuroscience, medieval and Renaissance studies, and Russian area studies), 20
minors, and additional interdisciplinary programs in African-American studies,
East Asian studies, environmental studies, Latin American and Caribbean
studies, poverty and human capability studies (Shepherd Program), and women's
and gender studies. Though the university has refused since 2003 to submit data
to "Princeton Review", the 2006 edition of "The Best 357 Colleges" ranked W&L
highly in its for "Best Overall Academic Experience," "Professors Get High
Marks," and "Professor Accessibility". In the 2007 edition, Washington and Lee
was ranked fourth in "Professors Get High Marks" and sixth in "Professor
Accessibility". Combining academics with an active social culture, Washington
and Lee ranked 14th in "Best Overall Academic Experience for Undergraduates".
Research. The school offers undergraduate students research opportunities. The
R.E. Lee Undergraduate Research Program funds summer research under the
supervision of faculty members. The Student Summer Independent Research program
supports seniors conducting independent research in the social sciences,
humanities and the arts. The Leyburn Scholars Program in Anthropology provides
stipends supporting student research in anthropology during both the academic
year and summer. The school also conducts a biannual undergraduate research
conference called Science, Society, and the Arts. Student life. Athletics. The
school's teams are known as "The Generals" and compete in NCAA Division III in
the Old Dominion Athletic Conference and the Centennial Conference for
wrestling. Washington and Lee has 11 men's teams (baseball, basketball, cross
country, football, golf, lacrosse, soccer, swimming, tennis, track & field, and
wrestling) and 10 women's teams (basketball, cross country, field hockey,
lacrosse, riding, soccer, swimming, tennis, track & field, and volleyball).
Washington and Lee will be adding a women's golf team in 2012. Washington and
Lee holds two NCAA National Championship titles. In 1988, the men's tennis team
won the NCAA Division III National Championship title. In 2007, the women's
tennis team claimed the NCAA Division III National Championship title. In 2006,
2010, and 2012, The Generals football team won the Old Dominion Athletic
Conference championship. Student activities. Every four years, the school
sponsors the Washington and Lee Mock Convention for whichever political party
(Democratic or Republican) does not hold the Presidency. The Convention has
received gavel-to-gavel coverage on C-SPAN and attention from many other
national media outlets. The convention has correctly picked the out-of-power
nominee for 18 of the past 23 national elections. It has been wrong twice since
1948, including its incorrect choice of Hillary Clinton in 2008. In 1984, the
failure of the scoreboard significantly slowed the vote tally process and
almost led to a wrong selection. The Washington Post declared Washington and
Lee's Mock Convention "one of the nation’s oldest and most prestigious mock
conventions." Washington and Lee University has several mysterious societies
including the Cadaver Society, the Sigma Society, and the Mongolian Minks.
Fraternities and sororities. Greek letter organizations play a major role in
Washington and Lee's social scene. The following is a list of active,
recognized fraternities and sororities. Fraternities. The Kappa Alpha Order,
one of the Lexington Triad, was founded at W&L. Dormant fraternity chapters at
Washington and Lee also include Alpha Chi Rho, Alpha Tau Omega, Chi Phi, Delta
Sigma Phi, Delta Tau Delta, Delta Upsilon, Theta Delta Chi. Phi Kappa Sigma,
Psi Upsilon, Phi Epsilon Pi and Zeta Beta Tau. Media and culture. The eminent
photographer Sally Mann got her start at Washington and Lee, photographing the
construction of the law school while a university employee. The photos
eventually became the basis of a one-woman exhibition at the Corcoran Gallery
in Washington, D.C. Secretariat, who holds the record for the fastest time in
the Kentucky Derby and winner of the Triple Crown in 1973, wore blue and white
(as vividly shown in the 2010 Disney movie) because his owner, Christopher
Chenery, was a graduate and trustee of Washington and Lee. A Washington and Lee
art history professor, Pamela Hemenway Simpson, in 1999 wrote the only
scholarly book on linoleum, giving it the title "Cheap, Quick and Easy". The
book also examines other home-design materials once used by the lower classes
to emulate their betters. More recently, she has become an expert, perhaps the
leading academic expert, on butter sculpture. Washington and Lee is home to a
collection of 18th- and 19th-century Chinese and European porcelain, the gift
of Euchlin Dalcho Reeves, a 1927 graduate of the law school, and his wife,
Louise Herreshoff. In 1967, Mr. Reeves contacted Washington and Lee about
making "a small gift," which turned out to be a collection of porcelain so vast
that it filled two entire houses which he and his wife owned in Providence,
Rhode Island. A number of dirt-covered picture frames, found in the two houses,
were put on the van along with the porcelain. Soon it was discovered that the
frames actually contained Impressionist-like paintings created by Louise as a
young woman in the early days of the century. Mrs. Reeves had, it turned out,
been a painter of stupendous talent, certified when in 1976 the Corcoran
Gallery in Washington mounted a posthumous one-woman exhibition of her works.
Their story is helped by the fact that he ("Boy") was almost 30 years younger
than she ("Dol"). The world's first recorded streaker — George William Crump
— was a student at Washington College, in 1804. He later became a U.S.
Congressman. Music. Before it morphed into a swing, Dixieland and bluegrass
standard, "The Washington and Lee Swing" was one of the most well known — and
widely borrowed — football marches ever written, according to Robert
Lissauer's "Encyclopedia of Popular Music in America." Schools and colleges
from Tulane to Slippery Rock copied it (sometimes with attribution). It was
written in 1910 by Mark W. Sheafe, '06, Clarence A. (Tod) Robbins, '11, and
Thornton W. Allen, '13. It has been recorded by virtually every important jazz
and swing musician, including Glenn Miller (with Tex Beneke on vocals), Louis
Armstrong, Kay Kyser, Hal Kemp and the Dukes of Dixieland. "The Swing" was a
trademark of the New Orleans showman Pete Fountain. The trumpeter Red Nichols
played it (and Danny Kaye pretended to play it) in the 1959 movie "The Five
Pennies." (Here is an audio excerpt from a 1944 recording by Jan Garber, a
prominent dance-band leader of the era. Here is an exuberant instrumental
version by a group called the Dixie Boys, which YouTube dates to 2006.) The
"Swing" was parodied in "The Dummy Song" by Ray Brown and Lew Henderson.
"Dummy" was recorded by NRBQ, Louis Armstrong, Louis Prima and Glenn Miller's
vocal jazz group, the Modernaires, among many others, and was used in the movie
"You've Got Mail." In literature. A fictionalized representation of the
University appears in L'Étudiant étranger by Philippe Labro (1986, Editions
Gallimard), translated into English two years later and published as "The
Foreign Student" (Ballantine Books)[http://www.amazon.com/The-Foreign-Student-
Philippe-Labro/dp/0345346963/ref=sr_1_2?ie=UTF8&qid=1331508841&sr=8-2]. In 1994
it was made into a movie, starring Robin Givens and Marco Hofschneider, but it
grossed only $113,000 at the box office. Other novels about the university
include "Geese in the Forum" (Knopf, 1940) by Lawrence Edward Watkin, a
professor of English who went on to become a screenwriter for Disney (the
college faculty were the titular geese); "The Hero" (Julian Messner, 1949), by
Millard Lampell, filmed as "Saturday's Hero," starring Donna Reed and John
Derek (Columbia Studios, 1951), about a football player who struggles to
balance athletics, academics and a social life; and "A Sound of Voices Dying"
by Glenn Scott (E.P. Dutton, 1954), released in a paperback edition in 1955
under the new title "Farewell My Young Lover" (replete with a lurid
illustration on the cover).[http://www.amazon.com/Farewell-Young-Lover-Sound-
Voices/dp/B001VNWLE8]
