Wealth effect The wealth effect is an economic term, referring to an increase
(decrease) in spending that accompanies an increase (decrease) in perceived
wealth.¬ ¬  ‚Ä¢  Effect on individuals. The effect would cause changes in the
amounts and distribution of consumer consumption caused by changes in consumer
wealth. People should spend more when one of two things is true: when people
"actually are" richer, objectively, or when people "perceive themselves" to be
richer‚Äîfor example, the assessed value of their home increases, or a stock
they own goes up in price. Demand for some goods (especially Inferior goods)
typically decreases with increasing wealth. For example, consider consumption
of cheap fast food versus steak. As someone becomes wealthier, their demand for
cheap fast food is likely to decrease, and their demand for more expensive
steak may increase. Consumption may be tied to relative wealth. Particularly
when supply is highly inelastic - or in the case of monopoly - one's ability to
purchase a good may be highly related to one's relative wealth in the economy.
Consider for example the cost of real estate in a city with high average wealth
(for example New York or London), in comparison to a city with a low average
wealth. Supply is fairly inelastic, so if a helicopter drop (or gold rush) were
to suddenly create large amounts of wealth in the low wealth city, those who
did not receive this new wealth would rapidly find themselves crowded out of
such markets, and materially worse off in terms of their ability to consume/
purchase real estate (despite having participated in a weak Pareto
improvement). In such situations, one cannot dismiss the relative effect of
wealth on demand and supply, and cannot assume that these are static. (see also
General equilibrium). However, according to David Backus, an NYU economist, the
wealth effect is not observable in economic data, at least in regards to
increases or decreases in home or stock equity. For example, while the stock
market boom in the late 1990s (q.v. dot-com bubble) increased the wealth of
Americans, it did not produce a significant change in consumption, and after
the crash, consumption did not decrease. Economist Dean Baker disagrees and
says that ‚Äúhousing wealth effect‚Äù is well-known and is a standard part of
economic theory and modeling, and that economists expect households to consume
based on their wealth. He cites approvingly research done by Carroll and Zhou
that estimates that households increase their annual consumption by 6 cents for
every additional dollar of home equity.
