Wealth Wealth is the abundance of valuable resources or material possessions.
The word wealth is derived from the old English "weal", which is from an Indo-
European word stem. An individual, community, region or country that possesses
an abundance of such possessions or resources is known as wealthy. The concept
of wealth is of significance in all areas of economics, and clearly so for
growth economics and development economics yet the meaning of wealth is
context-dependent. At the most general level, economists may define wealth as
"anything of value" which captures both the subjective nature of the idea and
the idea that it is not a fixed or static concept. Various definitions and
concepts of wealth have been asserted by various individuals and in different
contexts. Defining wealth can be a normative process with various ethical
implications, since often wealth maximization is seen as a goal or is thought
to be a normative principle of its own. The United Nations definition of
"inclusive wealth" is a monetary measure which includes the sum of natural,
human and physical assets. Natural capital includes land, forests, fossil
fuels, and minerals. Human capital is the population's education and skills.
Physical (or "manufactured") capital includes such things as machinery,
buildings, and infrastructure. Definition. For definitions of "wealth," see
also "The Wealth of Nations" and Max Weber, "The Protestant Ethic and the
Spirit of Capitalism". Adam Smith, in his seminal work "The Wealth of Nations",
described wealth as "the annual produce of the land and labour of the society".
This "produce" is, at its simplest, that which satisfies human needs and wants
of utility. In popular usage, wealth can be described as an abundance of items
of economic value, or the state of controlling or possessing such items,
usually in the form of money, real estate and personal property. An individual
who is considered wealthy, affluent, or rich is someone who has accumulated
substantial wealth relative to others in their society or reference group. In
economics, net wealth refers to the value of assets owned minus the value of
liabilities owed at a point in time. Wealth can be categorized into three
principal categories: personal property, including homes or automobiles;
monetary savings, such as the accumulation of past income; and the capital
wealth of income producing assets, including real estate, stocks, bonds, and
businesses. All these delineations make wealth an especially important part of
social stratification. Wealth provides a type of social safety net of
protection against an unforeseen decline in one‚Äôs living standard in the
event of job loss or other emergency and can be transformed into home
ownership, business ownership, or even a college education. 'Wealth' refers to
some "accumulation" of resources (net asset value), whether abundant or not.
'Richness' refers to an "abundance" of such resources (income or flow). A
wealthy individual, community, or nation thus has more accumulated resources
(capital) than a poor one. The opposite of wealth is destitution. The opposite
of richness is poverty. The term implies a social contract on establishing and
maintaining ownership in relation to such items which can be invoked with
little or no effort and expense on the part of the owner. The concept of wealth
is relative and not only varies between societies, but varies between different
sections or regions in the same society. A personal net worth of US $10,000 in
most parts of the United States would certainly not place a person among the
wealthiest citizens of that locale. However, such an amount would constitute an
extraordinary amount of wealth in impoverished developing countries. Concepts
of wealth also vary across time. Modern labor-saving inventions and the
development of the sciences have enabled the poorest sectors of today's society
to enjoy a standard of living equivalent if not superior to the wealthy of the
not-too-distant past. This comparative wealth across time is also applicable to
the future; given this trend of human advancement, it is likely that the
standard of living that the wealthiest enjoy today will be considered
impoverished by future generations. Industrialization emphasized the role of
technology. Many jobs were automated. Machines replaced some workers while
other workers became more specialized. Labour specialization became critical to
economic success. However, physical capital, as it came to be known, consisting
of both the natural capital and the infrastructural capital, became the focus
of the "analysis of wealth". Adam Smith saw wealth creation as the combination
of materials, labour, land, and technology in such a way as to capture a profit
(excess above the cost of production). The theories of David Ricardo, John
Locke, John Stuart Mill, in the 18th century and 19th century built on these
views of wealth that we now call classical economics. Marxian economics ("see
labor theory of value") distinguishes in the "Grundrisse" between material
wealth and human wealth, defining human wealth as "wealth in human relations";
land and labour were the source of all material wealth. Buckminster Fuller
defines wealth in the following manner: ‚ÄúWealth is our organized capability
to cope effectively with the environment in sustaining our healthy regeneration
and decreasing both the physical and metaphysical restrictions of the forward
days of our lives.‚Äù Economic analysis. In economics, wealth in a commonly
applied accounting sense is the net worth of a person, household, or nation,
that is, the value of all assets owned net of all liabilities owed at a point
in time. For national wealth as measured in the national accounts, the net
liabilities are those owed to the rest of the world.¬ ¬  ‚Ä¢ Nancy D. Ruggles,
1987. "social accounting," ', v. 4, pp.¬ 377-82, esp. p.¬ 380. The term may
also be used more broadly as referring to the productive capacity of a society
or as a contrast to poverty.¬ ¬  ‚Ä¢ David S. Landes, 1998. "The Wealth and
Poverty of Nations". Review.¬ ¬  ‚Ä¢ Partha Dasgupta, 1993. "An Inquiry into
Well-Being and Destitution". Description and review. Analytical emphasis may be
on its determinants or distribution.¬ ¬  ‚Ä¢ E.N. Wolff, 2002. "Wealth
Distribution," "International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral
Sciences", pp.¬ 16394-16401. Abstract.¬ ¬  ‚Ä¢ Robert L. Heilbroner, 1987.
[2008]). ', v. 4, pp. 880-83. Brief preview link. Economic terminology
distinguishes between two types of variables: stock and flow. Wealth, as
measurable "at a date" in time, is a "stock", like the value of an orchard on
December 31 minus debt owed on the orchard. For a given amount of wealth, say
at the beginning of the year, income from that wealth, as measurable "over" say
a year is a "flow". What marks the income as a flow is its measurement per unit
of time, like the value of apples yielded from the orchard per year. In
macroeconomic theory the 'wealth effect' may refer to the increase in aggregate
consumption from an increase in national wealth. One measure of it is the
wealth elasticity of demand. It is the percentage change in the amount demanded
of for each one-percent change in wealth. Wealth may be measured in nominal or
real values, that is in money value as of a given date or adjusted to net out
price changes. The assets include those that are tangible (land and capital)
and "financial" (money, bonds, etc.). Measurable wealth typically excludes
intangible or nonmarketable assets such as human capital and social capital. In
economics, 'wealth' corresponds to the accounting term 'net worth'. But
analysis may adapt typical accounting conventions for economic purposes in
social accounting (such as in national accounts). An example of the latter is
generational accounting of social security systems to include the present value
projected future outlays considered as liabilities.¬ ¬  ‚Ä¢ Laurence J.
Kotlikoff, 1992, "Generational Accounting". Free Press. Macroeconomic questions
include whether the issuance of government bonds affects investment and through
the wealth effect. Environmental assets are not usually counted in measuring
wealth, in part due to the difficulty of valuation for a non-market good.
Environmental or green accounting is a method of social accounting for
formulating and deriving such measures on the argument that an educated
valuation is superior to a value of zero (as the implied valuation of
environmental assets).¬ ¬  ‚Ä¢ United States National Research Council, 1994.
"Assigning Economic Value to Natural Resources", National Academy Press.
Chapter-preview links. Sociological treatments. "Wealth provides an important
mechanism in the intergenerational transmission of inequality." Less than 10%
of the wealthiest people in America inherited family fortunes. But the effect
of inherited wealth can also be seen on a more modest level. For example, a
couple who buy a house with financial help from their parents or a student who
has his or her college education paid for; in both scenarios the participants
are benefiting directly from the accumulated wealth of previous generations.
Wealth and social class. Social class is not identical to wealth, but the two
concepts are related (particularly in Marxist theory), leading to the combined
concept of Socioeconomic status. Partly as a result of different economic
conditions of life, members of different social classes often have different
value systems and view the world in different ways. As such, there exist
different "conceptions of social reality, different aspirations and hopes and
fears, different conceptions of the desirable." The way the various social
classes in society view wealth vary and these diverse characteristics are a
fundamental dividing line among the classes. According to Richard H Ropers, the
concentration of wealth in the United States is inequitably distributed. In
1996, the United States federal government reported that the net worth of the
top 1 percent of people in the United States was approximately equal to that of
the bottom 90 percent. The upper class. Upper class values include higher
education, and the wealthiest people the accumulation and maintenance of
wealth, the maintenance of social networks and the power that accompanies such
networks. Children of the upper class are typically schooled on how to manage
this power and channel this privilege in different forms. It is in large part
by accessing various edifices of information, associates, procedures and
auspices that the upper class are able to maintain their wealth and pass it to
future generations. The middle class. The middle class places a greater
emphasis on income. The middle class views wealth as something for emergencies
and it is seen as more of a cushion. This class comprises people that were
raised with families that typically owned their own home, planned ahead and
stressed the importance of education and achievement. They earn a significant
amount of income and also have significant amounts of consumption. However
there is very limited savings (deferred consumption) or investments, besides
retirement pensions and homeownership. They have been socialized to accumulate
wealth through structured, institutionalized arrangements. Without this set
structure, asset accumulation would likely not occur. The lower class. Those
with the least amount of wealth are the poor. (see underclass) Wealth
accumulation for this class is to some extent prohibited. People that receive
AFDC transfers cannot own more than a trivial amount of assets, in order to be
eligible and remain qualified for income transfers. Most of the institutions
that the poor encounter discourage any accumulation of assets. Distribution.
Although precise data are not available, the total household wealth in the
world, excluding human capital, has been estimated at $125 trillion (USD 125
x1012) in year 2000. Including human capital, the United Nations estimated it
in 2008 to be $118 trillion in the United States alone. About 90% of global
wealth is distributed in North America, Europe, and "rich Asia-Pacific"
countries (not including India), and 1% of adults are estimated to hold 40% of
world wealth, a number which falls to 32% when adjusted for purchasing power
parity. Wealth in the form of land. In the western tradition, the concepts of
owning land and accumulating wealth in the form of land were engendered in the
rise of the first state, for a primary service and power of government was, and
is to this day, the awarding and adjudication of land use rights. Land
ownership was also justified according to John Locke. He claimed that because
we mix our labour with the land, we thereby deserve the right to control the
use of the land and benefit from the product of that land (but subject to his
Lockean proviso of "at least where there is enough, and as good left in common
for others."). Additionally, in developed countries post-agrarian society
(industrial society) this argument has many critics (including those influenced
by Georgist and geolibertarian ideas) who argue that since land, by definition,
is not a product of human labor, any claim of private property in it is a form
of theft; as David Lloyd George observed, "to prove a legal title to land one
must trace it back to the man who stole it." Many older ideas have resurfaced
in the modern notions of ecological stewardship, bioregionalism, natural
capital, and ecological economics. Anthropological views. Anthropology
characterizes societies, in part, based on a society's concept of wealth, and
the institutional structures and power used to protect this wealth. Several
types are defined below. They can be viewed as an evolutionary progression.
Many young adolescents have become wealthy from the inheritance of their
families. The interpersonal concept. Early hominids seem to have started with
incipient ideas of wealth, similar to that of the great apes. But as tools,
clothing, and other mobile infrastructural capital became important to survival
(especially in hostile biomes), ideas such as the inheritance of wealth,
political positions, leadership, and ability to control group movements (to
perhaps reinforce such power) emerged. Neandertal societies had pooled funerary
rites and cave painting which implies at least a notion of shared assets that
could be spent for social purposes, or preserved for social purposes. Wealth
may have been collective. Accumulation of non-necessities. Humans back to and
including the Cro-Magnons seem to have had clearly defined rulers and status
hierarchies. Digs in Russia have revealed elaborate funeral clothing on a pair
of children buried there over 35,000 years ago. This indicates a considerable
accumulation of wealth by some individuals or families. The high artisan skill
also suggest the capacity to direct specialized labor to tasks that are not of
any obvious utility to the group's survival. Control of arable land. The rise
of irrigation and urbanization, especially in ancient Sumer and later Egypt,
unified the ideas of wealth and control of land and agriculture. To feed a
large stable population, it was possible and necessary to achieve universal
cultivation and city-state protection. The notion of the state and the notion
of war are said to have emerged at this time. Tribal cultures were formalized
into what we would call feudal systems, and many rights and obligations were
assumed by the monarchy and related aristocracy. Protection of infrastructural
capital built up over generations became critical: city walls, irrigation
systems, sewage systems, aqueducts, buildings, all impossible to replace within
a single generation, and thus a matter of social survival to maintain. The
social capital of entire societies was often defined in terms of its relation
to infrastructural capital (e.g. castles or forts or an allied monastery,
cathedral or temple), and natural capital, (i.e. the land that supplied locally
grown food). Agricultural economics continues these traditions in the analyses
of modern agricultural policy and related ideas of wealth, e.g. the ark of
taste model of agricultural wealth. The role of technology. Industrialization
emphasized the role of technology. Many jobs were automated. Machines replaced
some workers while other workers became more specialized. Labour specialization
became critical to economic success. However, physical capital, as it came to
be known, consisting of both the natural capital (raw materials from nature)
and the infrastructural capital (facilitating technology), became the focus of
the analysis of wealth. Adam Smith saw wealth creation as the combination of
materials, labour, land, and technology in such a way as to capture a profit
(excess above the cost of production).
