West Gosforth West Gosforth is an electoral ward in the north of Newcastle upon
Tyne, Tyne and Wear, England. It was created in 2004. The population of the
ward is 9,681, 3.7% of the total population of Newcastle upon Tyne. Car
ownership in the area is 78.1%, higher than the city average of 54.7%. Other
wards in Gosforth include East Gosforth (covering Gosforth south of the High
Street, South Gosforth and High West Jesmond) and Parklands (which includes
northern Gosforth including Melton Park and Brunton Park). The Coxlodge area of
Gosforth is in Fawdon Ward. Recreation and leisure. The ward many large green
spaces including Dukes Moor, Coxlodge Welfare Ground and St. Nicholas Park. The
ward has two Tyne and Wear Metro stations: Regent Centre and Wansbeck Road. The
ward has a library and swimming pool. In November 2006, the library was closed
and moved to a nearby temporary location. The single story building was
demolished and has been replaced by a new two story building. The new Library
and Customer Service Centre building was formally opened on 8 February 2008 by
John Grundy, a local resident and television presenter. The library was used as
a polling station for the 2008 local elections; a temporary hut was used the
previous year. Other amenities. West Gosforth has a business park, called
Regent Centre, which is home to companies such as Virgin Money (formerly
Northern Rock). Wansbeck Road has a small shopping centre, which includes a
small Co-operative food supermarket; Until 2008 there was also a FreshXpress/
Kwik Save store, which was demolished and has been re-built from scratch as a
Netto (now Asda). This Netto/Asda store opened on 5 November 2009 and also used
the former land of the Collingwood pub. Following Asda's buyout of Netto this
store was converted into an Asda, their second such store in Gosforth. One half
of Gosforth High Street is also in the ward. Ward boundary. The West Gosforth
ward boundary starts at the Blue House roundabout and heads north along the
Great North Road/Gosforth High Street (odd numbers included.) Opposite the Asda
Superstore, it turns west at the roundabout and follows the Metro line to
Wansbeck Road station. It heads south along Wansbeck Road to Jubilee Road
before turning east along Jubilee Road (odd numbers included) to the Welford
Daycare Centre. The boundary continues west to the rear of St Nicholas Nature
Reserve and the rear of the properties on Prince’s Meadow onto Kenton Road
(Numbers 23-59 Wall Close included.) It continues south along Kenton Road to
Salter’s Road, then turns west to the rear of Kenton Park Shopping Centre and
continues south to the rear of Wyndham County Primary School to Nuns Moor/
Newcastle United Golf Course. Finally it travels east along the moor to the
Grandstand Road/ Kenton Road junction and continues east along Grandstand Road
to the Blue House roundabout. Charts and tables. Owner occupied property stands
at 80.4% much higher than the city average of 53.3%. The properties are as
follows.
