Western Journalism Center The Western Journalism Center (also called the
Western Center for Journalism) was founded in 1991 by Joseph Farah and James H.
Smith. It is based in Sacramento, California. Projects. The Center helped fund
Christopher W. Ruddy (who later founded NewsMax) to investigate conspiracies
surrounding the death of Vincent Foster, which was part of the Arkansas
Project. Eventually, "the Center placed some 50 ads reprinting Ruddy's
"Pittsburgh Tribune-Review" stories in the "Washington Times", then repackaged
the articles as a packet titled "The Ruddy Investigation," which sold for $12."
In addition, "Farah also bought full page ads publicizing Ruddy's allegations
that appeared in papers including "The New York Times", "Washington Post",
"Chicago Tribune", and "Los Angeles Times"" and "the ad campaign brought in
over $500,000, half from individual donors-many of whom bought Foster
conspiracy materials-and half from foundations, including $100,000 from
Carthage." The Carthage Foundation is controlled by Richard Mellon Scaife,
whose foundations gave $330,000 to the Center in 1994 and 1995. Later, "WJC
circulated a video featuring Ruddy's claims, "Unanswered-The Death of Vincent
Foster", that was produced by author James Davidson, chairman of the National
Taxpayers Union (NTU) and co-editor of the Strategic Investment newsletter."
During the 2012 Todd Akin "legitimate rape" controversy, Karl Rove remarked
that Republicans "should sink Todd Akin" and joked that "If he's found
mysteriously murdered, don't look for my whereabouts". In response, WJC created
RoveMustGo.com to circulate a petition asserting that "Karl Rove has made
himself toxic to Republicans by his incredibly offensive and dangerous
statement suggesting the murder of Congressman Todd Akin of Missouri." Though
Rove later issued an apology for the joke, as of September 4, 2012, WJC was
still running Facebook ads for the site. Lawsuit. In 1998, the Center sued the
IRS claiming it was audited in 1996 for political reasons. The lawsuit was
thrown out, with appeals denied. A lower court ruled that the IRS could not be
sued on allegations of politically motivated auditing practices, while a
federal appeals court ruled that the Center's lawsuit was barred by the statute
of limitations. Ownership. In 1997, Farah created the news website
WorldNetDaily as a division of the Western Journalism Center. In 1999,
WorldNetDaily was spun off as a for-profit division of the Center. The Center
and Farah own a majority of WorldNetDaily's stock. The Center doesn't include
either an address or telephone number on its letterhead, but is believed to be
headed by conservative author, speaker, and political consultant Floyd Brown.
