Which? Which? is a product-testing and consumer campaigning charity with a
magazine, website and various other services run by Which? Ltd (also known as
the Consumers' Association, still the official name of the charity). Based in
the United Kingdom, it engages in advocacy campaigns on various consumer
protection issues and aims to promote informed consumer choice in the purchase
of goods and services, by testing products, highlighting inferior products or
services, raising awareness of consumer rights and offering independent advice.
The organisation exists to make individuals as powerful as the organisations
they have to deal with in their daily lives and maintains its independence by
not accepting advertising or freebies. "Which?" receives no government funding.
The vast majority of "Which?'s" income comes from subscriptions to its products
and services. Profits are used to fund advocacy activity and inform the public
on consumer issues. In the past, "Which?" used prize draws - similar to
"Reader's Digest" - to gain additional subscribers, but following some
criticism of this method, the organisation discontinued prize draws in 2006.
New subscribers are attracted via free mini-guides and trial offers. "Which?"
also holds legislative powers to take action on behalf of consumers, including
the ability to bring a super-complaint to the Office of Fair Trading (OFT), a
power first used to call for an investigation into private dentistry in 2001.
Today, "Which?" is the largest consumer organisation in the UK, with over 1.2
million subscribers. History and background. 1950s: beginnings The organisation
was set up in 1957 as a response to the changing values and concerns of the
post-war era, at a time of rapid changes in product markets and consumer
behaviour - and a corresponding growth in sharp trading practices. To combat
this, Michael Young, research director for the Labour Party, proposed setting
up a 'Consumer Advisory Service' to be considered for the party's 1950
manifesto, only to be rejected by Harold Wilson. Encouraged by the efforts of
Dorothy and Ray Goodman in the United States, Young continued to push the idea
and in October 1957 the first "Which?" magazine was published from a converted
garage in Bethnal Green. Its central aim was to improve the standard of goods
and services available to the public in the UK. The publication started as a
small 32-page magazine that included reports on electric kettles, sunglasses,
aspirin, cake-mixes, scouring powders, no-iron cottons and British cars. By
1959, membership reached 150,000 and a membership services office in Hertford.
1960–1970: In 1960, "Which?" helped to found the International Organisation
of Consumer Unions, later Consumers International. As circulation of "Which?
magazine" increased, new premises were found in 1961 at 14, Buckingham Street,
WC2. This collection of tiny offices and cubby holes, handily placed above the
basement Gordon’s wine bar in Villiers Street, remained the centre for
editorial, research and publishing activities until 1987. In 1962, coverage
expands with the launch of the first quarterly "Which? car" supplement, which
becomes "Motoring Which?" in 1965, followed by "Money Which?" in 1968. In 1970,
"Which?" bought a set of buildings in Harpenden, Hertfordshire, to set up labs
to test products including domestic appliances, DIY equipment, and consumer
electronics. Previously, the work had been contracted out. The 1970s saw
"Which?" taking a greater campaigning role, and it began to adopt a more
aggressive stance on issues such as lead poisoning and aircraft noise. In 1971,
for example, "Which?" published the first league table on the tar and nicotine
content of cigarettes. "Handyman Which?" was launched in 1971, followed by
"Holiday Which?" in 1974, and there was a deeper foray into book publishing
throughout the decade. Guides on gardening, DIY and personal finance were
launched in a book series called "Which? Way". The organisation also dabbled in
high street consumer advice centres during the 1970s. There were more than 120
such centres operating in 1977-8, with many of them funded by local councils.
The centres closed as funding was withdrawn by the government in 1980. In 1982,
another "Which?" title launched - "Gardening Which?" - which coincided with the
organisation's silver jubilee celebrations. A year later, "Handyman Which?",
"Money Which?" and "Motoring Which?" titles were merged into a revamped full-
colour "Which? magazine". "Which?" continued campaigning on consumer safety
issues, with its car safety test results strengthening calls to legislate car
manufacturers to fit seat belts in all new cars, helping to make it compulsory
to Clunk Click Every Trip in 1983. In 1986, "Which?" acquired health title Self
Health which later becomes "Health Which?". In 1987, the 300-strong employees
moved to 2, Marylebone Road, W1 with a view to consolidating these functions in
one properly-designed building. That the new space was too small to include the
60 staff of the Marketing Department, who occupied a different building in
Euston Road for a number of years afterwards, was a minor oversight. In 1992,
"Which?" launched another satellite publication, this one aimed at youngsters
aged 11–15, called Check It Out!. The magazine failed to take off and closed
in June 1994. In 1995 testing facilities were moved to Milton Keynes where they
remained until 2002, when the majority of the "Which?" testing activities were
contracted out. "Which?" Online, the first incarnation of the Which? website,
was launched in 1996. The first issue of "Computing Which?" was published in
December 1999. The whole organisation, including its charitable arm, formerly
the Consumers' Association is rebranded as "Which?" in 2004. Following the
deregulation of the gas and electricity industry, "Which?" launched a free
online energy comparison service called "Switch with Which?" in 2005, to help
consumers compare energy tariffs and switch to a different supplier. The
service was awarded Energywatch Confidence Code accreditation in 2006. Digital
development continues throughout the decade: a new-look "Which?" website is
launched in 2006 and again in 2010. In 2007 the organisation celebrated its
50th anniversary, and released a nostalgic supplement looking back at its first
half century. More than 20 years after its first incarnation as "Money Which?",
a new money-themed magazine called "Which? Money" is unveiled in February 2007.
In the 2010 Superbrands index, "Which?" is ranked 5th in the "Media —
Newspapers and Magazines" category and 256th overall. An opinion-led blog
tackling the ‘consumer issues of the day’, "Which? Conversation", followed
by an online mobile comparison and switching service, "Which? Mobile", both
launch in 2010. Product testing. "Which?" carries out systematic testing of
consumer products and financial services, the results of which are published in
reports in its flagship publication, "Which? magazine", and on the "Which?"
website. Tests are carried out on consumer items like electrical and white
goods, cars, and computers, as well as health and financial and tradespeople
services, and supermarkets. Testing highlights issues such as reliability,
performance, safety, energy efficiency and value-for-money. Top-rated products
are awarded the "Which?" 'Best Buy' status logo, an accreditation well
recognised by industry and consumers. "Which?" first used the phrase in its
second magazine edition in 1958, to describe Boots 365 talcum powder.
Conversely, the worst performing products are labelled 'Don’t Buys'. The
"Which?" website has six topic-led sections: Technology, Home & Garden, Cars,
Money, Baby & child and Energy. Each of the six sections includes a combination
of subscription-only access to reviews and free advice articles about products
and services Which? tests, reviews and investigates. "Which?" awards The Which?
Awards is an annual event to 'celebrate the UK’s best products and services,
from cars and restaurants to supermarkets and financial services'. Award
winners are selected by Which? staff, based on test findings and feedback from
Which? members throughout the year. Winners include Hyundai, First Direct,
Bosch, Canon and Philips. Unusual test subjects As well as household products
such as washing machines, TVs and vacuum cleaners, "Which?" tests have also
included some more unusual products. Publications. Which? magazine "Which?
magazine" is the organisation’s flagship publication. It is a subscription-
only magazine and doesn't appear on the newsstand. The magazine reports on
topical consumer issues of the day, as well as publishing product testing
results and findings of original research and investigations. The magazine has
been edited by Martyn Hocking since 2008. The magazine also raises awareness of
trading it believes goes against the interests of consumers. Examples of this
including an expose into solar panel heating installation companies, an
undercover enquiry with the RNID revealing serious problems at shops selling
hearing aids and an investigation into product knowledge held by electronics
shop staff. Which? Travel "Which? Travel" is published four times a year. It is
a subscription-only magazine and doesn't appear on the newsstand. Its aim is to
offer customers 'practical advice and inspirational ideas, and will help you
choose the best travel companies, services and products'. The magazine was
first launched as "Holiday Which?" in 1974. It was then rebranded "Which?
Holiday", before being renamed to current title "Which? Travel" in January
2011. Which? Car "Which? Car" is a quarterly magazine that focuses on both new
and used cars, offering consumers 'help and advice on making their second
largest purchase after a house'. The magazine, which first appeared as a
quarterly supplement in "Which? magazine" in 1962, publishes the results of its
lab-based and on-the-road car tests, and also delivers research around car
reliability and satisfaction. "Which? Car" is currently the only "Which?"
magazine publication to be sold in newsagents and shops rather than via
subscription. Which? Money "Which? Money", re-launched in 2007, is the newest
"Which?" publication. It 'is totally dedicated to your money, bringing you
money-saving tips, expert comment, in-depth reports', and rates financial
products and services. "Which? Money" subscribers also receive free access to a
phone and email-based helpdesk service. Which? Computing "Which? Computing" is
a bi-monthly magazine that first appeared (as "Computing Which?") in December
1999, following the growing consumer interest in home computing. It 'covers a
broad spectrum of topics to allow you to make the right choices in today’s
complex technology marketplace'. Topics covered in the magazine include
Internet Service Providers, wireless technology and the latest tablet computer,
laptop and netbook releases. Subscribers to "Which? Computing" also receive
free access to an email-based helpdesk service. Which? Gardening Launched in
1982, "Which? Gardening" is a monthly publication focused on 'practical
gardening advice and beautiful photography'. The magazine carries out tests and
trials on flowers, plants, gardening products and equipment, as well as
reporting on gardening trends and issues. Policy, consultation and
parliamentary lobbying. Which? identifies where consumers are experiencing
problems and provides practical policy solutions. Which? regularly briefs MPs,
Peers, AMs, MLAs, MSPs and MEPs on consumer issues, addressing consumer
detriment at a National, European and International level. UK Government Which?
is in regular communication with politicians of all political parties in order
to deliver positive change for UK consumers. For example, Which? successfully
lobbied to put an end to the '65 day rule' that allowed energy companies to
wait 65 days before informing their customers of a price change. Former Prime
Minister Gordon Brown said Which?'s 'campaigns and magazines have transformed
the world in which we live'. Which? joined forces with Rt Hon David Davis
(British politician) MP, Rt Hon John McFall MP and Dr Vince Cable MP, to form
The Future of Banking Commission, which launched its recommendations in June
2010. Scotland In January 2002, Which? established an office in Edinburgh to
strengthen lobbying work with members of the Scottish parliament. European
Union Which? aims to put itself at the heart of EU policy and decision-making
processes to ensure the voices of UK consumers are heard and, where necessary,
influence international negotiations. It works with the European umbrella
organisation, the European Consumers' Association (BEUC) which brings together
over forty consumer organisations from across Europe to represent common
consumer interests within the EU institutions. Legal powers. Super-complaints
The Enterprise Act of 2002 enabled consumer organisations such as Which? to
issue super-complaints to the Office of Fair Trading (OFT). Which? is one of
eight organisations able to issue a super-complaint. The Consumers' Association
was among the first groups granted these new powers. A super-complaint can be
made about any market that is not working properly for consumers. As consumers
are not in the position to overcome the issue themselves, Which? can issue a
super-complaint on consumers' behalf. The OFT has 90 days in which to assess
the complaint and decide what to do about it. It can reject the complaint in
part or as a whole, it can launch a market investigation, take action under
competition law or consumer law, or refer the market to the Competition
Commission for further investigation. Which? made its first super complaint
about private dentistry in 2001. It has since made complaints about care homes,
the Northern Ireland banking sector and credit card interest calculation
methods. Its latest super complaint (March 2011) relates to unfair debit and
credit card payment surcharges issued by retailers. The OFT upheld the super-
complaint in June 2011, described as a 'victory for consumers' by Which? chief
executive, Peter Vicary Smith. Legal action against rogue traders In 2005
Which? was granted legal powers to bring rogue traders to account for their
actions under Part 8 of the Enterprise Act 2002. Unfair contract terms Which?
has statutory powers under the Unfair Terms in Consumer Contracts Regulations
1999. Which? can seek an injunction to restrain the use of an unfair contract
term by a trader against consumers. Competition Appeals Tribunal Which? is one
of the 'specified bodies' who, under the Enterprise and Competition Acts, may
bring proceedings before the Competition Appeals Tribunal (CAT) on behalf of
two or more consumers for damages. Which? was granted specified body status on
October 1, 2005 by the Ministers of the Department of Trade and Industry. In
April 2007 Which? launched its first representative action on behalf of
consumers unlawfully overcharged for football shirts due to price fixing.
Organisational structure. The Consumers’ Association is made up of a board
who report to a council of trustees. The corporate management group, who run
the day-to-day management of Which? Ltd, report to the Consumers Association
and ensure the organisation is properly run in the charity's interest. Council
and members The organisation is governed by a Council of 12 elected and six co-
opted members. Patrick Barwise is the current chairman. Any Which? member can
stand for the Council, with Which? subscriber Roger Pittock elected in 2003,
for instance. None of the Council or Board members are paid, although they are
entitled to claim reasonable expenses. Council members Which? campaigns. Which?
campaigns on personal finance, energy, technology and food and health issues.
Consumers help form Which?'s campaigning agenda. The Which? campaigns website
explains the organisation's latest lobbying positions, documents progress and
explains how consumers can get involved. In February 2011, "Which?" used its
powers to launch a super-complaint against excessive credit card surcharges and
fees. The OFT upheld the super-complaint in June 2011, described as a 'victory
for consumers' by "Which?" chief executive, Peter Vicary Smith. Online
services. Which.co.uk The "Which?" website is the online arm of "Which?
magazine". The website is used to regularly publish product reviews following
independent testing, which only subscribing "Which?" customers are able to log
in and view. The website also offers free, impartial advice content across a
range of consumer interest areas, including Technology, Home & Garden, Money,
Cars, Baby & Child and Environment & Saving Energy. Free videos and initial
'first look' product reviews are available for all readers to access. The
website is also used to keep readers informed of "Which?"’s latest
campaigning work. Which? Legal service "Which? Legal service" offers an
unlimited telephone and email advice service to subscribing members on consumer
legal rights, from trained lawyers – including employment, property, will-
writing and travel rights. Subscribers pay a fixed annual fee for the service.
"Which?" Mortgage advisory service In November 2010, Which? announced plans to
offer its members and their friends and family a free telephone-based mortgage
advice service, regulated by the Financial Services Authority (FSA).
