Whitewash (censorship) To whitewash is a metaphor meaning "to gloss over or
cover up vices, crimes or scandals or to exonerate by means of a perfunctory
investigation or through biased presentation of data". It is especially used in
the context of corporations, governments or other organizations. Etymology. Its
first reference dates back to 1591. Whitewash is a cheap white paint or coating
of chalked lime used to quickly give a uniform clean appearance to a wide
variety of surfaces, for instance, the entire interior of a barn. In 1800, the
word was used in a political context, when a Philadelphia "Aurora" editorial
said that "if you do not whitewash President Adams speedily, the Democrats,
like swarms of flies, will bespatter him all over, and make you both as
speckled as a dirty wall, and as black as the devil." Modern usage. Many
dictatorships and authoritarian states, as well as democratic countries, have
used the method of whitewash in order to glorify the results. During the
Soviet-era, Joseph Stalin adjusted photographs of himself with Vladimir Lenin,
in order to position himself closer as to give an impression of a closer
relationship between the two. Later, during the Soviet invasion of
Czechoslovakia following the Prague Spring of 1968, the Press Group of Soviet
Journalists released a collection of "facts, documents, press reports and eye-
witness accounts," which was promptly nicknamed "The White Book" both for its
white cover and its attempts to whitewash the invasion by creating the
impression that the Warsaw Pact countries had the right and duty to invade.
North Korean radio broadcasts claim to have an abundance in food supplies, yet
the government receives food aid from foreign states. Japan is accused of
whitewashing its history of warfare and imperialism by omitting or minimizing
subjects such as the Nanking Massacre in textbooks. In the study of reputation
systems by means of algorithmic game theory, whitewashing is used to refer to
an agent abandoning their tarnished identity and re-creating a new blank one,
in what is more widely known in Internet slang as sockpuppeting. Fictional
usage. Novels by George Orwell have dealt with the subject of whitewash as
well. In "Animal Farm", the pig Napoleon tries to whitewash history by deleting
a few characters from the minds of the other animals. This was perceived as a
direct reference to the USSR under Stalin.
