White nationalism White nationalism is a political ideology that advocates a
racial definition of national identity for white people. It has been argued
that white separatism and white supremacism may be considered subgroups within
white nationalism. In a 2003 interview, political scientist Carol Swain
described research she had done undertaken on the subject, suggesting American
white nationalists believed "the interests of each of these groups (Hispanic,
black, and white citizens of America) would be better served if each had a
separate nation-state of its own". The white nationalist school of thought
tends to avoid the term "supremacy", because of its negative connotations. The
contemporary white nationalist movement in the United States could be regarded
as a reaction to what is perceived as a decline in white demographics, politics
and culture. According to Samuel P. Huntington, the contemporary white
nationalist movement is increasingly cultured, intellectual and academically
trained. Some have suggested that rather than espousing violence, white
nationalists tend to use statistics and social science data to argue for a
self-conscious white identity. By challenging established policies on
immigration, civil rights and racial integration, white nationalists seek to
build bridges with moderately conservative white citizens. Views. White
nationalists argue that every nationality feels a natural affection for its own
kind. They advocate racial self-preservation and claim that culture is a
product of race. According to white nationalist Samuel T. Francis, it is "a
movement that rejects equality as an ideal and insists on an enduring core of
human nature transmitted by heredity." Jared Taylor, a white nationalist,
claims that similar racial views were held by many mainstream American leaders
before the 1950s. Jared Taylor has argued that a natural hierarchy should
triumph over the "false promise of egalitarianism", and that the downfall of
white dominance spells doom for representative government, the rule of law and
freedom of speech. According to Samuel P. Huntington, white nationalists argue
that the demographic shift in the United States towards non-whites brings a new
culture that is intellectually and morally inferior. They argue that with this
demographic shift comes affirmative action, immigrant ghettos and declining
educational standards. Most American white nationalists say immigration should
be restricted to people of European ancestry. White nationalists embrace a
variety of religious and non-religious beliefs, including various denominations
of Christianity, generally Protestant, although some specifically overlap with
white nationalist ideology (Christian Identity, for example, is a family of
white supremacist denominations), Germanic Neopaganism (e.g. Wotanism) and
atheism. Definitions of whiteness. Most white nationalists define white people
in a restricted way. In the United States, it often—though not
exclusively—implies European ancestry of non-Jewish descent. White
nationalists draw primarily on 19th-century racial taxonomy, which neither
reached a consensus on racial categories nor is accepted by contemporary
geneticists. Some white nationalists, such as Jared Taylor, have argued that
Jews can be considered "white". Though most white nationalists oppose Israel
and Zionism, several white nationalists (such as William Daniel Johnson) have
expressed support for Israel. Different racial theories, such as Nordicism and
Germanism, define different groups as white, both excluding some southern and
eastern Europeans because of a perceived racial taint. Pan-Aryanism defines
whites as individuals native to Europe, the Americas, Australia, New Zealand,
South Africa, the Middle East and Central/West Asia who are wholly of Caucasoid
descent or are overwhelmingly from the following Caucasoid subraces, or any
combination thereof: Indo-European ("Aryan"-including the Iranian peoples but
not the Indo-Aryans), Old European (e.g. Basque), or Hamitic (in modern times
supposedly confined to Berbers). Other white nationalists use the term "Pan-
Europeanism" to include all European ethnic groups. History. According to one
view, white nationalism is a product of the modern centralized state's
emergence in the West, like all nationalisms. The term originated as a self-
description by some groups, primarily in the United States, to describe their
belief in a racially defined collective identity of white people. In the 19th
and early 20th century, racial definitions of the American nation were common,
resulting in race-specific immigration restrictions, such as the Chinese
Exclusion Act. The 1915 film "Birth of a Nation" is an example of an
allegorical invocation of white nationalism during this time. The Thule-Society
developed out of the "Germanic Order" in 1918, and those who wanted to join the
"Order" in 1917 had to sign a special "blood declaration of faith" concerning
the lineage: "The signer hereby swears to the best of his knowledge and belief
that no Jewish or coloured blood flows in either his or in his wife's veins,
and that among their ancestors are no members of the coloured races." As the
Nazi ideologist Alfred Rosenberg said on the 29th of May 1938 on the
Steckelburg in Schlüchtern: "It is however certain that all of us share the
fate of Europe, and that we shall regard this common fate as an obligation,
because in the end the very existence of White people depends on the unity of
the European continent." The White Australia ideal was semi-official policy in
Australia until 1975. In South Africa, white nationalism was championed by the
National Party starting in 1948, as opposition to apartheid heated up. Starting
in the 1960s, white nationalism grew in the United States as the conservative
movement developed in mainstream society. Samuel P. Huntington argues that it
developed as a reaction to a perceived decline in the essence of American
identity as European, Anglo-Protestant and English-speaking. The slogan "white
power" was coined by American Nazi Party leader George Lincoln Rockwell, who
used the term in a debate with Stokely Carmichael of the Black Panther Party,
after Carmichael issued a call for "black power". In recent years, the Internet
has provided an expansion of audiences for white nationalism. Criticism. Anti-
racist organizations generally have argued that ideas such as white pride and
white nationalism exist merely to provide a sanitized public face for white
supremacy. Kofi Buenor Hadjor argues that black nationalism is a response to
racial discrimination, while white nationalism is the expression of white
supremacy. Other critics have described white nationalism as a "...somewhat
paranoid ideology" based upon the publication of pseudo-academic studies. Carol
M. Swain argues that the unstated goal of white nationalism is to appeal to a
larger audience, and that most white nationalist groups promote white
separatism and racial violence. Opponents accuse white nationalists of hatred,
racial bigotry and destructive identity politics. White supremacist groups have
a history of perpetrating hate crimes, particularly against people of Jewish or
African descent. Examples include the lynching of black people by the Ku Klux
Klan (KKK). Some critics argue that white nationalists — while posturing as
civil rights groups advocating the interests of their racial group —
frequently draw on the nativist traditions of the KKK and the British National
Front. Critics have noted the anti-semitic rhetoric used by white nationalists,
as highlighted by the promotion of conspiracy theories such as Zionist
Occupation Government.
