White separatism White separatism is a separatist political movement that seeks
separate economic and cultural development for white people. White separatists
generally claim genetic affiliation with Anglo-Saxon cultures, Nordic cultures,
or other white European cultures. Some also affiliate with white ethnic
cultures that developed outside of Europe, like the Neo-Confederates and Boer-
Afrikaner Nationalists. Advocates of racial separatism say that separatism
differs from racial supremacy in that separatists believe that all races and
ethnic groups have the right to develop their own culture separately and any
race should not dominate another. They argue that racial differences are
important and they strongly oppose miscegenation. Critics argue that
contemporary white separatism is a public facade adopted by white supremacists.
Supporters of white separatism claim that describing white separatists as white
supremacist is a smear. Critics say it doesn't matter if you use white
supremacist or white separatist because it is a distinction without a
difference. White separatists claim that their desire to remove themselves from
racially integrated society and to secede based on race removes the possibility
of subjugating other racial and ethnic groups, and thus has no relation to
white supremacy. Racial separatism differs from racial segregation, which is
characterized by separation of different racial groups within the same state -
- that is racial separation in daily life, such as eating in restaurants,
drinking from water fountains, using restrooms, attending school, going to the
movies, or in renting or purchasing a home. Racial segregation is enforced by
the government of a multiracial nation, as in South Africa under apartheid,
which seeks to separate different cultures within the borders of the same
state. The concept of homeland separatism is that all different ethnic or
racial groups have the right to self-determination in their own homeland. The
view is that no cultural group should govern over another, and different
cultures should live in peace and harmony with each other by developing
separately in their own nation state.
