White poppy (symbol) The white poppy is an artificial flower used as a symbol
of peace, worn as an alternative to, or complement to, the red remembrance
poppy for Remembrance Day or Anzac Day. History. In 1926, a few years after the
introduction of the red poppy in the UK, the idea of pacifists making their own
poppies was put forward by a member of the No More War Movement (and that the
black centre of the British Legion's red poppies should be imprinted with "No
More War"). Their intention was to remember casualties of all wars, with the
added meaning of a hope for the end of all wars; the red poppy, they felt,
signified only the British military dead. However they did not pursue the idea.
The first white poppies were sold by the Co-operative Women's Guild in 1933.
The Peace Pledge Union (PPU) took part in their distribution from 1934, and
white poppy wreaths were laid from 1937 as a pledge to peace that war must not
happen again. Anti-war organisations such as the Anglican Pacifist Fellowship
now support the White Poppy Movement. Those who promote the wearing of white
poppies argue that the red poppy also conveys a specific political standpoint,
and point to the divisive nature of the red poppy in Northern Ireland, where it
is worn mainly by the Unionist community. They choose the white poppy over the
red often because they wish to disassociate themselves from the militaristic
aspects of Remembrance Day, rather than the commemoration itself. New Zealand.
In New Zealand, a "White Poppy Annual Appeal" has been run in 2009 and 2010 by
Peace Movement Aotearoa in the week preceding Anzac Day, with all proceeds
going to "White Poppy Peace Scholarships". The appeal was controversial, with
Veterans' Affairs Minister Judith Collins claiming the white poppy appeal was
"incredibly disrespectful to those who served their country". White poppies
have also been worn in New Zealand to mark Remembrance Day. In previous years,
the annual white poppy appeal was run as a fundraiser for the Campaign for
Nuclear Disarmament around the time of Hiroshima Day in August. Responsibility
for organising the annual appeal was transferred to Peace Movement Aotearoa, as
the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament in New Zealand closed down in 2008.
Controversy. The Royal British Legion has no official opinion on the wearing of
white poppies, stating that it "is a matter of choice, the Legion doesn't have
a problem whether you wear a red one or a white one, both or none at all".
However, opponents of the white poppy argue that the traditional red poppy
already encompasses the sentiments claimed for the white poppy, such as
"remembering all victims of war", and consider that it undermines the message
of remembrance. In the 1930s, when the white poppy was first established, some
women lost their jobs for wearing them. Others are concerned that the money
raised by the white poppy appeal may affect the funds raised for the Royal
British Legion by the red poppy appeal. In 1986, British prime minister
Margaret Thatcher expressed her "deep distaste" for the symbol during prime
minister's questions.
