Wipeout (elections) An electoral wipeout occurs when a major party receives far
fewer votes or seats in a Legislature than their position justifies. It is the
opposite of a landslide victory; the two frequently going hand in hand. Note
that the use of the phrase generally assumes that the returns were the product
of a legitimate election; show elections to fraudulent legislatures regularly
produce incredibly strong majorities for the ruling party(s). Australia.
Between 1901 and 1949, the upper house of the Australian Senate was elected by
a system of majoritarian or "winner-take-all" voting. Each state had 3 of its 6
Senators retiring at each half-senate election. Each voter had 3 votes at each
election, whether by first-past-the-post (FPTP) 1901-1918, or the alternative
vote. It was often the case that the 3 seats all went the same way, leading to
lopsided results in the six states such as 36-0 or 3-33. These results brought
the parliament into some disrepute. In 1948, the Single Transferable Vote (STV)
was introduced. At the same time, the number of senators per state was
increased from 6 to 10, with 5 instead of 3 retiring at each triennial
election. The increased number of vacancies per election would have exacerbated
the "landslide/wipeout" effect if the old winner-take-all system had been
retained. Instead, having more seats "increased" the degree of proportionality
between votes received and seats won by parties. Since the introduction of STV
in the Senate, the parties have generally been evenly balanced, with minor
parties and independents holding the balance of power. While frustrated, the
government in the lower house has had a lot of different people to negotiate
with. In the 2004 election, the government did the nearly impossible and gained
the 57% of the vote in one state to obtain a majority in its own right in the
senate from July 2005, when the new senators take up their seats. The number of
quotas required to win a majority (four) of six seats, at 57% (four-sevenths of
the votes), is so high because there are an even number of seats. In the lower
house, FPTP was changed to preferential voting in 1918. In the 1974 Queensland
state election, using single-member electorates and full-preferential voting,
the Labor opposition was reduced to a "cricket team" of eleven MPs, against the
National Country Party/ Liberal Party Coalition government with 69 seats (and 2
Independents). New Zealand. Until it moved to a proportional representation
system in 1996, general elections in New Zealand were also prone to the
possibility of wipeouts, though these in general involved the likelihood of
third parties getting few or no seats rather than one of the two major parties
being massively underrepresented. This former circumstance occurred most
starkly in the 1981 general election, in which the Social Credit Party gained
16.1% of the vote yet gained only two seats in the 92-seat parliament. The 1935
general election did, however, see a major party wipeout, and led to the
creation of a new major party. In the 1935 election, the Labour Party gained
46.1% of the vote to the United/Reform Coalition's 32.9%, but won 53 seats to
the United/Reform's 19. As a result of this election the two coalition parties
merged to form the National Party, which remains a major force is current New
Zealand politics. Sources. 1. [http://www.parliament.gov.sg/
Parliament%20Members/Htdocs/PM-consmap-map.html] Singapore's Constituency
Boundary Map
