Workers' Awaaz Workers' Awaaz (or "Workers' Voice") is a nonprofit, nonpartisan
female domestic workers' group based in New York City. Although the group
supports all women in domestic services, its primary focus is on women from
South Asia (India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka and Nepal). Workers' Awaaz
was founded in June 1997 by Gulnahar Ahmed, a Bangladeshi woman who came to the
United States in 1993 to work as a domestic. Workers' Awaaz assists workers in
ensuring that they are paid the minimum wage, receive overtime pay, are aware
of their rights under workers' compensation laws, and receive training in basic
employee rights and protection under state and federal law. The organization
also sues employers on behalf of domestic workers for violations of federal and
state laws, and organizes pickets and demonstrations against abusive employers.
Workers' Awaaz also works to build public awareness of the sometimes abusive
conditions under which many South Asian domestic workers labor in the U.S.
Since many immigrant domestics are isolated by language, working conditions and
restrictions placed on them by employers, Workers' Awaaz uses a variety of
outreach efforts to reach workers in need. It places advertisements in various
South Asian-related newspapers, sets up tables at South Asian community events,
and engages in face-to-face conversations in markets and stores. Lawsuits.
Workers' Awaaz has won several lawsuits filed on behalf of workers against
employers who did not pay minimum wage, withhold taxes or make Social Security
and other required government payments. In 1998, Workers' Awaaz, working with
the American Civil Liberties Union, won a $20,000 back pay settlement. In
January 2000, the organization won a back pay award for $50,000 from physicians
who refused to pay a domestic worker for nearly three years. Awards and grants.
In 1997, Workers' Awaaz won a $5,000 grassroots grant from the Ben & Jerry's
Foundation.[http://www.benjerry.com/foundation/grl_oct1997.html] In 1998, Ahmed
was honored as a fellow of the Petra Foundation for her advocacy work with
Workers' Awaaz. In 2000, the organization was awarded a Union Square Award from
the Tides Center for its grassroots activism and strengthening of immigrant
communities in New York City.[http://www.unionsquareawards.org/v2/awardees/
bio.asp?aID=69]
