Workers' self-management Worker self-management (sometimes called workers'
control or autogestion) is a form of workplace decision-making in which the
workers themselves agree on choices (for issues such as customer care, general
production methods, scheduling, division of labour) instead of an owner or
traditional supervisor telling workers what to do, how to do it and where to do
it. Examples of such self-management allegedly include the Paris Commune, the
Russian Revolution, the German Revolution, the Spanish Revolution, Titoist
Yugoslavia, Algeria under Ahmed Ben Bella, the "fábricas recuperadas" movement
in Argentina, the LIP factory in France in the 1970s, the Mondragón
Cooperative Corporation which is the Basque Country's largest corporation, AK
Press in the United States, etc. Argentina's "fábricas recuperadas" movement,
which emerged in response to Argentine's 2001 economic crisis, is the current
most significant workers' self-management phenomenon in the world. English-
language discussions of this phenomenon may employ several different
translations of the original Spanish expression other than "recovered factory".
For example, "recuperated factory/business", "reclaimed factory", and "worker-
run factory" have been noted. The phenomenon is also known as "autogestion,"
which comes from the French word for self-management (applied to factories,
popular education systems, and other uses). Worker self-management may coincide
with employee ownership. Workers' self-management is often the decision-making
model used in co-operative economic arrangements such as worker cooperatives,
workers' councils, participatory economics, and similar arrangements where the
workplace operates without a boss. This model of decision making does not
involve consulting all employees for every tiny issue in a time-consuming,
inefficient and ineffective manner. Real-world examples show that only large-
scale decisions are made by all employees during council meetings and small
decisions are made by those implementing them while coordinating with the rest
and following more general agreements. Theory. Autogestion was first theorized
by Pierre-Joseph Proudhon during the first part of the 19th century. It then
became a primary component of some trade union organizations, in particular
revolutionary syndicalism which was introduced in late 19th century France and
guild socialism in early 20th century Britain, although both movements
collapsed in the early 1920s. French trade-union CFDT (""Confédération
Française Démocratique du Travail"") included worker self-management in its
1970 program, before later abandoning it. The philosophy of workers' self-
management has been promoted by the Industrial Workers of the World (IWW) since
its founding in the United States in 1905. Critics of workers' self-management
from the left, such as Gilles Dauvé and Jacques Camatte, do not admonish the
model as reactionary but simply as not progressive in the context of developed
capitalism. Such critics suggest that capitalism is more than a relationship of
management. Rather, they suggest capitalism should be considered as a social
totality which workers' self-management in and of itself only perpetuates and
does not challenge - despite its seemingly radical content and activity. This
theory is used to explain why self-management in Yugoslavia never advanced
beyond the confines of the larger state monopoly economy, or why many modern
worker-owned facilities tend to return to hiring managers and accountants after
only a few years of operation. History. One significant experiment with
workers' self-management took place during the Spanish Revolution
(1936–1939). In the 1950s, at the height of the Cold War, Titoist Yugoslavia
advocated a socialist version of autogestion, in distinction from the Eastern
Bloc countries, all of which practiced central planning and state ownership of
industry. The economy of Yugoslavia was organized according to the theories of
Tito and – more directly – Edvard Kardelj. Croatian scientist Branko Horvat
also made a significant contribution to the theory of socialism ("radničko
samoupravljanje") as practiced in Yugoslavia. With the exception of a recession
in the mid-1960s, the country's economy prospered under Titoist Socialism.
Unemployment was low, the education level of the work force steadily increased.
The life expectancy (which was about 72 years) and living standards of Yugoslav
citizens was nearly equal to the life expectancy and living standards of
citizens of “western” capitalist countries such as Portugal. Due to
Yugoslavia's neutrality and its leading role in the Non-Aligned Movement,
Yugoslav companies exported to both Western and Eastern markets. Yugoslav
companies carried out construction of numerous major infrastructural and
industrial projects in Africa, Europe and Asia. After May 68 in France, LIP
factory, a clockwork factory based in Besançon, became self-managed starting
in 1973, after the management's decision to liquidate it. The LIP experience
was an emblematic social conflict of post-68 in France. CFDT (the CCT as it was
referred to in Northern Spain), trade-unionist Charles Piaget led the strike in
which workers claimed the means of production. The Unified Socialist Party
(PSU), which included former Radical Pierre Mendès-France, was in favour of
"autogestion" or self-management. South America. In October 2005 the first
"Encuentro Latinoamericano de Empresas Recuperadas" ("Latin American Encounter
of Recovered Companies") took place in Caracas, Venezuela, with representatives
of 263 such companies from different countries living through similar
economical and social situations. The meeting had, as its main outcome, the
"Compromiso de Caracas" (Caracas' Commitment); a vindicating text of the
movement. The "fábricas recuperadas" movement (Argentina). Argentina's
"fábricas recuperadas" movement, which emerged in response to Argentine's 2001
economic crisis, is the current most significant workers' self-management
phenomenon in the world. Workers took over control of the factories in which
they had worked, commonly after bankruptcy, or after a factory occupation to
circumvent a lockout. "Fábricas recuperadas" means "reclaimed/recovered
factories." The Spanish verb "recuperar" means not only "to get back", "to take
back" or "to reclaim" but also "to put back into good condition". Although
initially referring to industrial facilities, the term may also apply to
businesses other than factories (e.g. Hotel Bauen in Buenos Aires). Throughout
the 1990s in Argentina's southern province of Neuquén, drastic economic and
political events occurred where the citizens ultimately rose up. Although the
first shift occurred in a single factory, bosses were progressively fired
throughout the province so that by 2005 the workers of the province controlled
most of the factories. The movement emerged as a response to Argentine's 2001
economic crisis, and about 200 Argentine companies were "recovered" by their
workers and turned into co-operatives. Prominent examples include the Brukman
factory, the Hotel Bauen and FaSinPat (formerly known as Zanon). As of 2005,
about 15,000 Argentine workers run recovered factories. The phenomenon of
"fabricas recuperadas" ("recovered factories") is not new in Argentina. Rather,
such social movements were completely dismantled during the so-called "Dirty
War" in the 1970s. Thus, during Héctor Cámpora's first months of government
(May–July 1973), a rather moderate and left-wing Peronist, approximately 600
social conflicts, strikes and factory occupations had taken place. Many
recovered factories are run co-operatively and all workers receive the same
wage. Important management decisions are taken democratically by an assembly of
all workers, rather than by professional managers. The proliferation of these
"recoveries" has led to the formation of a recovered factory movement, which
has ties to a diverse political network including socialists, Peronists,
anarchists and communists. Organizationally, this includes two major
federations of recovered factories, the larger Movimiento Nacional de Empresas
Recuperadas (or National Movement of Recuperated Businesses, or MNER) on the
left and the smaller National Movement of Recuperated Factories (MNFR) on the
right. Some labor unions, unemployed protestors (known as piqueteros),
traditional worker cooperatives and a range of political groups have also
provided support for these take-overs. In March 2003, with the help of the
MNER, former employees of the luxury Hotel Bauen occupied the building and took
control of it. One of the highest difficulties such a movement faces is its
relation towards the classic economic system, as most classically managed firms
refused, for various reasons (among which ideological hostility to the very
principle of autogestion) to work and deal with recovered factories. Thus,
isolated recovered factories find it easier to work together in building an
alternative, more democratic economic system and thus manage to reach a
critical size and power which enables it to negotiate with the ordinary
capitalistic firms. The movement led in 2011 to a new bankruptcy law that
facilitates take over by the workers. The legislation was signed into law by
President Cristina Kirchner on June 29, 2011.
