Working class Working class (or lower class, labouring class, sometimes
proletariat) is a term used in the social sciences and in ordinary conversation
to describe those employed in lower tier jobs (as measured by skill, education
and lower incomes), often extending to those in unemployment or otherwise
possessing below-average incomes. Working classes are mainly found in
industrialized economies and in urban areas of non-industrialized economies. As
with many terms describing social class, "working class" is defined and used in
many different ways. When used non-academically, it typically refers to a
section of society dependent on physical labor, especially when compensated
with an hourly wage. Its use in academic discourse is contentious, especially
following the decline of manual labor in postindustrial societies. It is often
used synonymously for proletariat, particularly amongst Marxist authors. Some
academics question the usefulness of the concept of a working class. The term
is usually contrasted with the "upper class" and "middle class", in general
terms of access to economic resources, education, cultural interests, and other
goods and services. The cut-off between "working class" and "middle class" is
more specifically where a population spends money primarily as a lifestyle
rather than for sustenance (for example, on fashion versus merely nutrition and
shelter). Problematically, relying on this method of distinction would rule out
many of the people who are often identified as working class. Its usage can
alternately be derogatory, or can express a sense of pride in those who self-
identify as "working class". Definitions. For purposes of political science,
and less scientific or journalistic political analysis, defining the working
class as less well-educated workers is useful. One can then meaningfully
analyze the political opinions and political behavior of, say, the white
working class in the United States. In the case of the United States, for
example, the white working class is often defined as white, non-Hispanic
workers who have not completed college. Marxist definition. Karl Marx defined
the working class or proletariat as individuals who sell their labor power for
wages and who do not own the means of production. He argued that they were
responsible for creating the wealth of a society. He asserted that the working
class physically build bridges, craft furniture, grow food, and nurse children,
but do not own land, or factories. A sub-section of the proletariat, the
lumpenproletariat ("rag-proletariat"), are the extremely poor and unemployed,
such as day laborers and homeless people. In general, in Marxist terms, wage
laborers and those dependent on the welfare state are working class, and those
who live on accumulated capital and/or exploit the labor of others are not.
This broad dichotomy defines the class struggle. Different groups and
individuals may at any given time be on one side or the other. For example,
retired factory workers are working class in the popular sense; but to the
extent that they live off fixed incomes, financed by stock in corporations
whose earnings are profit extracted from current workers, retired factory
workers' interests, and possibly their identities and politics, are not working
class. Such contradictions of interests and identity within individuals' lives
and within communities can effectively undermine the ability of the working
class to act in solidarity to reduce exploitation, inequality, and the role of
ownership in determining people's life chances, work conditions, and political
power. The position of core capitalists is not nearly as contradictory within a
capitalist system. Capitalists get their income, wealth, status, and power from
owning the means of production, and they will have it managed for their own
aggrandizement. From the capitalist perspective, it would be silly to manage
production (or build political resources that could influence economic
relationships) for the benefit of workers. To the extent that workers sometimes
benefit in some ways from capitalism, it is not a central goal, but a
byproduct. Thus, operating with less class interest contradiction and less
identity contradiction, and more resources for political coordination,
capitalist class members can often coordinate and prosecute their interests
with a great deal of efficacy, over and against workers. History. The history
of the working class has been defined by two contradictory processes, the
immiseration of traditional communities in order to produce workers, and the
vast surplus of production available from industrialization creating better
living standards. Throughout this process workers have taken cultural and
political action to create their own cultures and positions within industrial
society. Many of these responses have emphasized that working class individuals
are defined by processes other than work. Working class history is generally
accepted to begin with the enclosure of English commons, and the generation of
paid industrial labor in manufactories in Holland and England. In feudal
Europe, the working class as such did not exist in large numbers. Instead, most
people were part of the laboring class, a group made up of different
professions, trades and occupations. A lawyer, craftsman and peasant were all
considered to be part of the same social unit, a third estate of people who
were neither aristocrats nor church officials. Similar hierarchies existed
outside Europe in other pre-capitalist societies. The social position of these
laboring classes was viewed as ordained by natural law and common religious
belief. This social position was contested, particularly by peasants, for
example during the German Peasants' War. In the late 18th century, under the
influence of the Enlightenment, European society was in a state of change, and
this change could not be reconciled with the idea of a changeless god-created
social order. Wealthy members of these societies created ideologies which
blamed many of the problems of working-class people on their morals and ethics
(i.e. excessive consumption of alcohol, perceived laziness and inability to
save money). In "The Making of the English Working Class", E.P. Thompson argues
that the English working class was present at its own creation, and seeks to
describe the transformation of pre-modern laboring classes into a modern,
politically self-conscious, working class. Vladimir Lenin saw the potential for
imperialism to ameliorate the drudgery of working class life in the advanced
countries, and argued this had already begun in the United Kingdom in the early
20th century. Access to cheap sports such as boxing and bicycling, expanded
food cultures including coffee, chocolate and later junk food, and particularly
access to motor vehicles and home ownership, transformed the complexion of
first world working classes during the 20th century. A similar process occurred
in the Soviet-style societies, but at a far slower pace. Starting around 1917,
a number of countries became ruled ostensibly in the interests of the working
class. (see Soviet working class) While arguments over standards of living and
potential growth rates have occurred in academic history and sociology, the
development indexes of these countries are often higher than other countries of
equivalent gross domestic product. However, additional criticisms have been
leveled at these countries from authors who criticize the presence of massive
human rights abuses which impacted primarily on workers, and for the lack of
democracy within and amongst the working class. Some historians have noted that
a key change in these Soviet-style societies has been a massive a new type of
proletarianisation, often effected by the administratively achieved forced
displacement of peasants and rural workers. Since then, three major industrial
states have turned towards semi-market-based governance (China, Laos, Vietnam,
Cuba), and one state has turned inwards into an increasing cycle of poverty and
brutalisation (North Korea). Other states of this sort have either collapsed
(such as the Soviet Union), or never achieved significant levels of
industrialization or large working classes. Since 1960, large-scale
proletarianisation and enclosure of commons has occurred in the third world,
generating new working classes at the margins of living. Additionally,
countries such as India have been slowly undergoing social change, expanding
the size of the urban working class.
