World's Smallest Political Quiz The World's Smallest Political Quiz is a 10-
question educational quiz for an American audience designed by the libertarian
Advocates for Self Government, created by Marshall Fritz. It associates the
quiz-taker with one of five categories: Libertarian, Left-Liberal, Centrist,
Right-Conservative, or Statist. According to the Advocates, the quiz was
designed primarily to be more accurate than the one-dimensional "left-right" or
"liberal-conservative" political spectrum by providing a two-dimensional
representation. The Quiz is composed of two parts: a diagram of a political
map; and a series of 10 short questions designed to help viewers quickly score
themselves and others on that map. The 10 questions are divided into two
groups, Economic and Personal, of five questions each. The answers to the
questions can be Agree, Maybe, or Disagree. Twenty points are given for an
Agree, ten points for a Maybe, and zero for Disagree. The scores are added for
each group and can be zero to one hundred. These two numbers are then plotted
on the diamond-shaped chart and the result displays the political group that
agrees most with the quiz taker. History. The chart associated with the Quiz is
based on the Nolan Chart devised during 1969 by libertarian political scientist
David Nolan. Nolan reasoned that virtually all human political action can be
divided into two general categories: economic and personal. In order to express
visually this insight, Nolan developed a two axis graph. One axis was for
economic freedom, and the other was for personal freedom. Nolan introduced his
chart by an article entitled "Classifying and Analyzing Politico-Economic
Systems" published in the January 1971 issue of The Individualist, a
libertarian newsletter. During 1985, Marshall Fritz founded the Advocates for
Self Government. Part of the Advocates' mission was to explain libertarian
ideas to the public. Fritz found that Nolan's chart was a great help with
explaining how libertarianism was distinct from conservatism and liberalism.
The first form the Quiz took was as a business card, with the ten questions
printed on it along with the chart. As of August 2004, over 7 million Quizzes
had been printed. The Quiz, then, is a combination of two elements: Nolan's
chart, and Fritz's idea of ten short questions to help a person find their
associated place on that graph. The quiz has also been represented in other
forms. During 1993, Brian Towey, with the help of his wife Ingrid, produced a
full-color, instant-scoring computer Quiz on disk, for the DOS and Windows
operating systems. Programmer Jon Kalb created an equally advanced version for
Macintosh computers. Toby Nixon created an ASCII text copy of the Quiz in the
era prior to the World Wide Web, and this version was circulated in newsgroups,
computer networks, bulletin boards, and on software. During 1995, Paul Schmidt
created the Advocates' website, with the current interactive version of the
World's Smallest Political Quiz. For an extensive and in-depth FAQ about the
Quiz, see http://www.theadvocates.org/quiz . Modifications to questions. The
ten questions have been modified over time. Uses. On August 23, 2000, Portrait
of America conducted a national telephone survey of 822 likely voters. Using
the same questions and scale, the survey found 32% of American voters are
centrists; 16% are libertarians; 14% are authoritarians; 13% liberal; 7% are
conservative; and, 17% border one or more categories. The margin of sampling
error is +/- 3 percentage points with a 95% level of confidence. According to
e-mails collected by the quiz's advocates, it has been used in 420 schools in
the United States. The online content associated with several textbooks is also
claimed to feature the Quiz.
