World government World government is the notion of a single common political
authority for all of humanity. Its modern conception is rooted in European
history, particularly in the philosophy of ancient Greece, in the political
formation of the Roman Empire, and in the subsequent struggle between secular
authority, represented by the Holy Roman Emperor, and ecclesiastical authority,
represented by the Pope. , there is no functioning global international
military, executive, legislature, judiciary, or constitution, with jurisdiction
over the entire planet. While the United Nations exists, its authority is
limited to a mostly advisory role, and its stated purpose is to foster
cooperation between existing national governments, rather than authority over
them. Furthermore, there are several states which are not included in the
United Nations. History. Hugo Grotius. "De jure belli ac pacis" ("On the Law of
War and Peace") is a 1625 book in Latin, written by Hugo Grotius and published
in Paris, on the legal status of war. It is now regarded as a foundational work
in international law. Grotius was born April 10, 1583. He was a philosopher,
theologian, playwright, and poet. Grotius is known for coming up with the idea
of having an international law, and is still acknowledged today by the American
society of International Law. Hugo was the first child of Jan de Groot and
Alida van Overschie. He was exiled from many countries, though many people had
great respect for him. Immanuel Kant. Immanuel Kant wrote the essay "Perpetual
Peace: A Philosophical Sketch (Zum ewigen Frieden. Ein philosophischer
Entwurf.) (1795)". In his essay, Kant describes three basic requirements for
organizing human affairs to permanently abolish the threat of present and
future war, and, thereby, help establish a new era of lasting peace throughout
the world. Specifically, Kant described his proposed peace program as
containing two steps. Three Definitive Articles would provide not merely a
cessation of hostilities, but a foundation on which to build a peace. Joseph
Smith. In early 19th century Mormon theology, Joseph Smith taught that a
theodemocracy would guide and direct the Kingdom of God (Zion) on the earth
during the end times. On March 11th, 1844, Smith organized a Council of Fifty,
who were to work under the direction of the Priesthood authorities of his
church, along with a Council of Friends. This group of three organizations was
expected to rule as a world government just prior to the Millennium. Karl
Krause. In 1811, German philosopher Karl Krause, suggested, in an essay titled
"The Archetype of Humanity", the formation of five regional federations:
Europe, Asia, Africa, America and Australia, aggregated under a world republic.
In 1842, the English poet Lord Alfred Tennyson, published the oft-quoted lines
"Locksley Hall": "For I dipt into the future, far as human eye could see / Saw
a Vision of the world, and all the wonder that would be /... / Till the war-
drum throbb'd no longer / and the battle-flags were furled / In the Parliament
of man, the Federation of the world. / There the common sense of most shall
hold / a fretful realm in awe / And the kindly earth shall slumber / lapt in
universal law". Ulysses S. Grant. Ulysses S. Grant commented, "I believe at
some future day, the nations of the earth will agree on some sort of congress
which will take cognizance of international questions of difficulty and whose
decisions will be as binding as the decisions of the Supreme Court are upon
us". Wendell Wilkie expanded on this notion in his book "One World". Harry
Truman. U.S. President Harry S. Truman commented: "We must make the United
Nations continue to work, and to be a going concern, to see that difficulties
between nations may be settled just as we settle difficulties between States
here in the United States. When Kansas and Colorado fall out over the waters in
the Arkansas River, they don't go to war over it; they go to the Supreme Court
of the United States, and the matter is settled in a just and honorable way.
There is not a difficulty in the whole world that cannot be settled in exactly
the same way in a world court". -- President Truman's remarks in Omaha,
Nebraska on June 5, 1948, at the dedication of the War Memorial. International
Peace Congress. Starting in 1843, International Peace Congresses were held in
Europe every two years, but lost their momentum after 1853 due to the renewed
outbreak of wars in Europe (Crimea) and North America (American Civil War).
International organizations. International organizations started forming in the
late 19th century – the International Committee of the Red Cross in 1863, the
Telegraphic Union in 1865 and the Universal Postal Union in 1874. The increase
in international trade at the turn of the 20th century accelerated the
formation of international organizations, and, by the start of World War I in
1914, there were approximately 450 of them. Support for the idea of
establishing international law grew during that period as well. The Institute
of International Law was formed in 1873 by the Belgian Jurist Gustave Rolin-
Jaequemyns, leading to the creation of concrete legal drafts, for example by
the Swiss Johaan Bluntschli in 1866. In 1883, James Lorimer published "The
Institutes of the Law of Nations" in which he explored the idea of a world
government establishing the global rule of law. The first embryonic world
parliament, called the Inter-Parliamentary Union, was organized in 1886 by
Cremer and Passy, composed of legislators from many countries. In 1904 the
Union formally proposed "an international congress which should meet
periodically to discuss international questions". League of Nations. The League
of Nations (LoN) was an inter-governmental organization founded as a result of
the Treaty of Versailles in 1919–1920. At its largest size from 28 September
1934 to 23 February 1935, it had 58 members. The League's goals included
upholding the Rights of Man, such as the rights of non-whites, women, and
soldiers; disarmament, preventing war through collective security, settling
disputes between countries through negotiation, diplomacy, and improving global
quality of life. The diplomatic philosophy behind the League represented a
fundamental shift in thought from the preceding hundred years. The League
lacked its own armed force and so depended on the Great Powers to enforce its
resolutions and economic sanctions and provide an army, when needed. However,
these powers proved reluctant to do so. Lacking many of the key elements
necessary to maintain world peace, the League failed to prevent World War II.
Hitler withdrew Germany from the League of Nations once he planned to take over
Europe. The rest of the Axis powers soon followed him. Having failed its
primary goal, the League of Nations fell apart and eventually was transformed
into the United Nations. The League of Nations consisted of the Assembly, the
Council, and the Permanent Secretariat. Below these were many agencies. The
Assembly was where delegates from all member states conferred. Each country was
allowed three representatives and one vote. Nazi Germany. The ruling Nazi Party
of 1933-1945 Germany envisaged the ultimate establishment of a world government
under the complete hegemony of the Third Reich. In its move to overthrow the
post-World War I Treaty of Versailles Germany had already withdrawn itself from
the League of Nations, and it did not intend to join a similar internationalist
organization ever again. In his desire and stated political aim of expanding
the "living space" ("Lebensraum") of the German people by destroying or driving
out "lesser-deserving races" in and from other territories dictator Adolf
Hitler may have devised an ideological system of self-perpetuating
expansionism, in which the expansion of a state's population would require the
conquest of more territory which would in turn lead to a further growth in
population which would then require even more conquests. In 1927 Rudolf Hess
relayed to Walter Hewel Hitler's belief that world peace could only be acquired
"when one power, the racially best one, has attained uncontested supremacy".
When this control would be achieved, this power could then set up for itself a
world police and assure itself "the necessary living space... The lower races
will have to restrict themselves accordingly". Atlantic Charter. The Atlantic
Charter was a published statement agreed between Britain and the United States
of America. It was intended as the blueprint for the postwar world after World
War II, and turned out to be the foundation for many of the international
agreements that currently shape the world. The General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade (GATT), the post-war independence of British and French possessions, and
much more are derived from the Atlantic Charter. The Atlantic charter was made
to show the goals of the allied powers during World War II. It first started
with The United States and Great Britain, and later all the allies would follow
the charter. Some goals include access to raw materials, reduction of trade
restrictions, and freedom from fear and wants. The name, The Atlantic Charter,
came from a newspaper that coined the title. However, Winston Churchill would
use it, and from then on the Atlantic Charter was the official name. In
retaliation, the Axis powers would raise their morale and try to work their way
into Great Britain. The Atlantic Charter was a stepping stone into the creation
of the United Nations. United Nations. World War II, 1939–1945, resulted in
an unprecedented scale of destruction of lives (over 60 million dead, most of
them civilians), and the use of Weapons of Mass Destruction. Some of the acts
committed against civilians during the war were on such a massive scale of
savagery, they came to be widely considered as crimes against humanity itself.
As the war's conclusion drew near, many shocked voices called for the
establishment of institutions able to permanently prevent deadly international
conflicts. This led to the founding of the United Nations in 1945, which
adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in 1948. Many, however, felt
that the UN, essentially a forum for discussion and coordination between
sovereign governments, was insufficiently empowered for the task. A number of
prominent persons, such as Albert Einstein, Winston Churchill, Bertrand Russell
and Mohandas K. Gandhi, called on governments to proceed further by taking
gradual steps towards forming an effectual federal world government. The United
Nations main goal is to work on international law, international security,
economic development, human rights, social progress, and eventually world
peace. The United Nations replaced the League of Nations in 1945, after World
War II. Nearly every country is in the U.N., 193 member states. The United
Nations gather regularly in order to solve big problems throughout the world.
There are six official languages: Arabic, English, Spanish, Russian, French,
and Chinese. The United Nations is also financed by some of the wealthiest
nations. The flag shows the Earth from a map that shows all of the occupied
continents. World Federalist Movement. The years between the conclusion of
World War II and 1950, when the Korean War started and the Cold War mindset
became dominant in international politics, were the "golden age" of the world
federalist movement. Wendell Wilkie's book "One World", first published in
1943, sold over 2 million copies. In another, Emery Reves' book "The Anatomy of
Peace"(1945) laid out the arguments for replacing the UN with a federal world
government and quickly became the "bible" of world federalists. The grassroots
world federalist movement in the US, led by people such as Grenville Clark,
Norman Cousins, Alan Cranston and Robert Hutchins, organized itself into
increasingly larger structures, finally forming, in 1947, the United World
Federalists (later renamed to World Federalist Association, then Citizens for
Global Solutions), claiming membership of 47,000 in 1949. Similar movements
concurrently formed in many other countries, leading to the formation, at a
1947 meeting in Montreux, Switzerland, of a global coalition, now called World
Federalist Movement. By 1950, the movement claimed 56 member groups in 22
countries, with some 156,000 members. Garry Davis. In France, 1948, Garry Davis
began an unauthorized speech calling for a world government from the balcony of
the UN General Assembly, until he was dragged away by the guards. Mr. Davis
renounced his American citizenship and started a Registry of World Citizens,
which claimed to have registered over 750,000 people in less than two years.
Opinion polls carried out by UNESCO in 1948-1949 found world government favored
by a majority of respondents in six European countries and rejected in three
other countries (Australia, Mexico and the United States). On September 4,
1953, Davis, from the City Hall of Ellsworth, Maine, announced the formation of
the "World Government of World Citizens" based on 3 "World Laws" — One God
(or Absolute Value), One World, and One Humanity. Following this declaration
mandated he claimed by article 21(3) of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, he formed the United World Service Authority in New York City as the
administrative agency of the new government. Its first task was to design and
issue a "World Passport" based on article 13(2) of the UDHR. To date, over
800,000 of these documents have been issued to individuals worldwide. They have
been recognized de facto by over 180 countries. World Passport (1953). The
World Passport is a 45 page document issued by the World Service Authority, a
non-profit organization, citing Article 13, Section 2, of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. World Passports have reportedly been accepted on a
"de facto", case-by-case basis by over 174 countries and, at one time or
another, on an explicit, legal or "de jure" basis by Burkina Faso, Ecuador,
Mauritania, Tanzania, Togo and Zambia. The latest edition of the World
Passport, issued January 2007, is an MRD (machine readable document) with an
alphanumeric code bar enabling computer input plus an embedded "ghost" photo
for security, printing overcovered with a plastic film. The passport is in 7
languages: English, French, Spanish, Russian, Arabic, Chinese and Esperanto.
Two covers are available: "World Passport", and "World Government Passport"
(for registered World Citizens), ("passport" is in 7 languages on both covers).
Duration is 8 years, 5 years or 3 years. Other documents issued by WSA are a
World Birth Certificate (Art. 1, UDHR), a World Political Asylum Card (Art. 14,
UDHR), a World Marriage Certificate, (Art. 16, UDHR) and a World Identity Card,
(Art 21,3, UDHR). Each passport is numbered and each page has the World Citizen
logo in the background. There are two pages for affiliation with companies,
organizations, and firms. There are nineteen visa pages in the passport. In the
back cover there are spaces for personal information such as a person’s home
address. Legal Realism (1954). Legal anthropologist E. Adamson Hoebel concluded
his treatise on broadening the legal realist tradition to include non-Western
nations: “Whatever the idealist may desire, force and the threat of force are
the ultimate power in the determination of international behavior, as in the
law within the nation or tribe. But until force and the threat of force in
international relations are brought under social control by the world
community, by and for the world society, they remain the instruments of social
anarchy and not the sanctions of world law. The creation in clear-cut terms of
the corpus of world law cries for the doing. If world law, however, is to be
realized at all, there will have to be minimum of general agreement as to the
nature of the physical and ideational world and the relation of men in society
to it. An important and valuable next step will be found in deep-cutting
analysis of the major law systems of the contemporary world in order to lay
bare their basic postulates – postulates that are too generally hidden;
postulates felt, perhaps, by those who live by them, but so much taken for
granted that they are rarely expressed or exposed for examination. When this is
done – and it will take the efforts of many keen intellects steeped in the
law of at least a dozen lands and also aware of the social nexus of the law –
then mankind will be able to see clearly for the first time and clearly where
the common consensus of the great living social and law systems lies. Here will
be found the common postulates and values upon which the world community can
build. At the same time the truly basic points of conflict that will have to be
worked upon for resolution will be revealed. Law is inherently purposive". The
end of the Cold War (1991). While enthusiasm for multinational federalism in
Europe incrementally led, over the following decades, to the formation of the
European Union, the onset of the Cold War (1946–1991) eliminated the
prospects of any progress towards federation with a more global scope. The
movement quickly shrunk in size to a much smaller core of activists, and the
FWG idea all but disappeared from wide public discourse. Following the
dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, interest in a federal world government
and, more generally, in the global protection of human rights, was renewed. The
most visible achievement of the world federalism movement during the 1990s is
the Rome Statute of 1998, which led to the establishment of the International
Criminal Court in 2002. In Europe, progress towards forming a federal union of
European states gained much momentum, starting in 1952 as a trade deal between
the German and French people lead, in 1992, to the Maastricht Treaty that
established the name and enlarged the agreement that the European Union (EU) is
based upon. The EU expanded (1995, 2004, 2007) to encompass, in 2007, nearly
half a billion people in 27 member states. Following the EU's example, the
African Union was founded in 2002 and the Union of South American Nations in
2004. Caliphate. Historically, the Caliphate was established by the followers
of the Prophet Muhammad in Medina after his death in 632. Abu Bakr who was the
closest associate of the prophet was selected as the first Caliph or Deputy;
hence the term Caliphate. Abu Bakr called himself the prophet's deputy and the
leader of Muslims. He and the three Caliphs selected after him shunned any
pretensions to royalty but later on ruling dynasties came into existence and
ruled until the end of the Ottoman Caliphate that came after its defeat in the
First World War along with Germany and the Austro-Hungarian Empire by, inter
alia, Britain, France and Russia in 1918. During the intervening centuries, the
Islamic Caliphate's authority expanded to encompass regions in Europe, Middle
East, South Asia, Central Asia and northern Africa. These territories were
ruled under Islamic law. The Caliphate was abolished by the Turkish National
Assembly under Mustafa Kemal Atatürk in 1924. In the modern era, many Islamic
organizations such as Hizb ut Tahrir, the Muslim Brotherhood, al-Qaeda, the
Taliban and Al-Shabaab have attempted to re-establish an Islamic state.
Existing regional unions of nations. The only union generally recognized as
having achieved the status of a supranational union is the European Union.
There are a number of other regional organisations that, while not
supranational unions, have adopted or intend to adopt policies that may lead to
a similar sort of integration in some respects. European Union. The most
relevant model for the incremental establishment of a global federation may be
the European Union, which politically unites a large group of widely diverse,
some formerly hostile, nations spread over a large geographical area and 500
million people. Though the EU is still evolving, it already has many attributes
of a federal government, such as open internal borders, a directly elected
parliament, a court system, an official currency (Euro) and a centralized
economic policy. The EU's lead is being followed by the African Union, the
Union of South American Nations, the Organization of Central American States,
and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations. A multitude of regional
associations, aggregating most nations of the world, are at different stages of
development towards a growing extent of economic, and sometimes political,
integration. The European Union consists of twenty-seven European states. It
has developed a “single market” which allows people of different countries
to travel from state to state without a passport. This also includes the same
policies when it comes to trading. The European Union is said to have 26% of
the world's money. Not all EU member states use the Euro; the United Kingdom,
for example, retains the pound Sterling. Where the Euro is in place, it allows
easy access for the free circulation of trade goods. Tariffs are also the same
for each country allowing no unfair practices within the union. With the free
movement from country to country, this allows people to travel easily and
freely. CARICOM. The Caribbean Community (CARICOM), is an organization of 15
Caribbean nations and dependencies. CARICOM's main purpose is to promote
economic integration and cooperation among its members, to ensure that the
benefits of integration are equitably shared and to coordinate foreign policy.
Its major activities involve coordinating economic policies and development
planning; devising and instituting special projects for the less-developed
countries within its jurisdiction; operating as a regional single market for
many of its members CARICOM Single Market and Economy (CSME); and handling
regional trade disputes. Since the establishment of CARICOM by the mainly
English Creole-speaking parts of the Caribbean region CARICOM has become
multilingual in practice with the addition of Dutch speaking Suriname on 4 July
1995 (although the lingua franca in Suriname is Sranan Tongo, which is an
English-based Creole like the languages spoken in much of the rest of CARICOM)
and Haiti, where French and Haitian Creole are spoken, on 2 July 2002. In 2001,
the heads of government signed a Revised Treaty of Chaguaramas in Trinidad and
Tobago, clearing the way for the transformation of the idea for a Common Market
aspect of CARICOM into instead a Caribbean Single Market and Economy. Part of
the revised treaty among member states includes the establishment and
implementation of the Caribbean Court of Justice (CCJ). African Union. The
African Union (AU) is an organisation consisting of fifty-four African states.
Established on July 9, 2002, the AU was formed as a successor to the
amalgamated African Economic Community (AEC) and the Organisation of African
Unity (OAU). Eventually, the AU aims to have a single currency and a single
integrated defence force, as well as other institutions of state, including a
cabinet for the AU Head of State. The purpose of the union is to help secure
Africa's democracy, human rights, and a sustainable economy, especially by
bringing an end to intra-African conflict and creating an effective common
market. Projects for improved economic and political cooperation are also
happening at a regional level with the Arab Maghreb Union, the Economic
Community of West African States, the Economic Community of Central African
States the Southern African Development Community and the East African
Community. ASEAN. ASEAN ( ), the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, is a
geo-political and economic organization of 10 countries located in Southeast
Asia, which was formed on August 8, 1967 by Indonesia, Malaysia, the
Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand as a display of solidarity against
communist expansion in Vietnam and insurgency within their own borders. Its
claimed aims include the acceleration of economic growth, social progress,
cultural development among its members, and the promotion of regional peace.
All members later founded the Asia Cooperation Dialogue, which aims to unite
the entire continent. Shanghai Cooperation Organisation. The Shanghai
Cooperation Organisation (SCO) is an intergovernmental organization which was
founded on June 14, 2001 by the leaders of the People's Republic of China,
Russia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan. Except for
Uzbekistan, these countries had been members of the Shanghai Five; after the
inclusion of Uzbekistan in 2001, the members renamed the organization.
Commonwealth of Independent States. The Commonwealth of Independent States is
comparable to a confederation similar to the original European Community.
Although the CIS has few supranational powers, it is more than a purely
symbolic organization, possessing coordinating powers in the realm of trade,
finance, lawmaking, and security. It has also promoted cooperation on
democratization and cross-border crime prevention. As a regional organization,
CIS participates in UN peacekeeping forces. Some of the members of the CIS have
established the Eurasian Economic Community with the aim of creating a full-
fledged common market. Arab League. The Arab League is a regional organization
of Arab states in Southwest Asia, and North and Northeast Africa. It was formed
in Cairo on March 22, 1945 with six members: Egypt, Iraq, Transjordan (renamed
Jordan after 1946), Lebanon, Saudi Arabia, and Syria. Yemen joined as a member
on May 5, 1945. The Arab League currently has 22 members, which also include,
Algeria, Bahrain, Comoros, Djibouti, Kuwait, Libya, Mauritania, Morocco, Oman,
Palestine, Qatar, Somalia, Sudan, Tunisia and UAE. It has also been proposed to
reform the Arab League into an Arab Union. the Arab League currently is the
most important organization in the region. Union of South American Nations. The
Union of South American Nations was founded in 2006-2008 and is modeled on the
European Union. It incorporates all the independent states of South America.
These states are Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Guyana,
Paraguay, Peru, Suriname, Uruguay, and Venezuela. South Asian Association for
Regional Cooperation. The South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation
(SAARC) is an economic and political organization of eight countries in
Southern Asia. In terms of population, its sphere of influence is the largest
of any regional organization: almost 1.5 billion people, the combined
population of its member states. It was established on December 8, 1985 by
India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Nepal, Maldives and Bhutan. In April
2007, at the Association's 14th summit, Afghanistan became its eighth member.
Organisation of Islamic Cooperation. The Organisation of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC) is an international organisation with a permanent delegation to the
United Nations. It groups 57 member states, from the Middle East, Africa,
Central Asia, Caucasus, Balkans, Southeast Asia and South Asia. The
organization claims it represents the Global Islamic World (ummah). The
official languages of the organisation are Arabic, English and French. Since
the nineteenth century, many Muslims had aspired to uniting the Muslim "ummah"
to serve their common political, economic, and social interests. Despite the
presence of secularist, nationalist, and socialist ideologies in modern Muslim
states, they have cooperated to form the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation.
The formation of the OIC happened in the backdrop of the loss of Muslim holy
sites in Jerusalem. The final cause sufficiently compelled leaders of Muslim
nations to meet in Rabat to establish the OIC on September 25, 1969. According
to its charter, the OIC aims to preserve Islamic social and economic values;
promote solidarity amongst member states; increase cooperation in social,
economic, cultural, scientific, and political areas; uphold international peace
and security; and advance education, particularly in the fields of science and
technology. The former flag of the OIC (shown on the right) has an overall
green background (symbolic of Islam). In the centre, there is an upward-facing
red crescent enveloped in a white disc. On the disc the words "Allahu Akbar"
(Arabic for "God is great") are written in Arabic calligraphy. On August 5,
1990, 45 foreign ministers of the OIC adopted the Cairo Declaration on Human
Rights in Islam to serve as a guidance for the member states in the matters of
human rights in as much as they are compatible with the Sharia, or Quranic Law.
Turkic Council. The Turkic Council is an international organization comprising
Turkic countries. Since 1992, the "Turkic Language Speaking Countries Summit"
has been organizing amongst the Turkic countries. On October 3, 2009, four of
these countries signed the Nahcivan Agreement. The organizational center is
İstanbul. Additionally, the Joint Administration of Turkic Arts and Culture
was founded in Almaty in 1992 and the "Turkic Countries Parliamentarian
Assembly" was founded in Baku in 1998. All of these organizations were coopted
into the Turkic Council. The Turkic Council has an operational style similar to
organization like the Arab League. The member countries are Azerbaijan,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Turkey. The remaining two Turkic states,
Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan are not currently official members of the council.
However, due to their neutral stance, they participate in international
relations and are strongly predicted to be future members of the council. The
idea of setting up this cooperative council was first put forward by Kazakh
President Nursultan Nazarbayev back in 2006. The World Constitution and
Parliament Association. The World Constitution and Parliament Association
(WCPA) was created in 1958 to promote democratic world government. During the
next 33 years the WCPA held four Global Constituent Assemblies centered around
creating a Constitution for the Federation of Earth. At the fourth assembly in
Troia, Portugal in 1991, final amendments to the Constitution were made and
approved. Even before this assembly, the organization has been involved in a
worldwide campaign to ratify the Earth Constitution under the provisions set
forth in Article 17. Since 1982, the WCPA has also organized sessions of the
Provisional World Parliament, the first of which was in Brighton, England and
the tenth session of which was in Kara, Togo in 2007. Under the authority of
Article 19 of the Constitution, the Parliament debates and passes provisional
world legislation that serves as a model and a guide for developing democratic
world government. The Parliament also works toward a founding ratification
convention at which the nations and people of Earth join together to ratify the
Constitution and initiate a new demilitarized, democratic world order. United
Nations Parliamentary Assembly. A United Nations Parliamentary Assembly (UNPA)
is a proposed addition to the United Nations System that would allow for
participation of member nations' legislators and, eventually, direct election
of United Nations (UN) parliament members by citizens worldwide. The idea was
raised at the founding of the League of Nations in the 1920s and again
following the end of World War II in 1945, but remained dormant throughout the
Cold War. In the 1990s and 2000s, the rise of global trade and the power of
world organizations that govern it led to calls for a parliamentary assembly to
scrutinize their activity. The Campaign for the Establishment of a United
Nations Parliamentary Assembly was formed in 2007 to coordinate pro-UNPA
efforts, which as of February 2009 has received the support of over 600 Members
of Parliament from over 90 countries worldwide. Current global governance
system. , there is no functioning global international military, executive,
legislature, judiciary, or constitution, with jurisdiction over the entire
planet. The Earth is divided geographically and demographically into mutually
exclusive territories and political structures called states which are
independent and sovereign in most cases. There are numerous bodies,
institutions, unions, coalitions, agreements and contracts between these units
of authority, but, except in cases where a nation is under military occupation
by another, "all" such arrangements depend on the continued consent of the
participant nations. Thus the use of violence is unprohibited throughout the
realm and is only checked by the threat of retaliatory actions. Where no such
threat exists a nation may freely use violence against another. A recent
development in international law is the International Criminal Court (ICC), the
first ever permanent international criminal court, which was established to
ensure that the gravest international crimes do not go unpunished. The ICC
treaty was signed by 139 national governments, of which 100 ratified it into
law by October 2005. In addition to the formal, or semi-formal, international
organizations and laws mentioned above, many other mechanisms act to regulate
human activities across national borders. In particular, international trade in
goods, services and currencies (the "global market") has a tremendous impact on
the lives of people in almost all parts of the world, creating deep
interdependency amongst nations (see globalization). Trans-national (or multi-
national) corporations, some with resources exceeding those available to most
governments, govern activities of people on a global scale. The rapid increase
in the volume of trans-border digital communications and mass-media
distribution (e.g., Internet, satellite television) has allowed information,
ideas, and opinions to rapidly spread across the world, creating a complex web
of international coordination and influence, mostly outside the control of any
formal organizations or laws.
