World revolution World revolution is the Marxist concept of overthrowing
capitalism in all countries through the conscious revolutionary action of the
organized working class. These revolutions would not necessarily occur
simultaneously, but where local conditions allowed a revolutionary party to
successfully replace bourgeois ownership and rule, and install a workers' state
based on social ownership of the means of production. In most Marxist schools,
such as Trotskyism, the essentially international character of the class
struggle and the necessity of global scope are critical elements and a chief
explanation of the failure of socialism in one country. The end goal is to
achieve world socialism, and later, stateless communism. Communist movements.
The October Revolution of 1917 in Russia sparked a revolutionary wave of
socialist and communist uprisings across Europe, most notably the German
Revolution, the Hungarian Revolution, Biennio Rosso and the revolutionary war
in Finland with the short lived Finnish Socialist Workers' Republic, which made
large gains and met with considerable success in the early stages; see also
Revolutions of 1917-23. Particularly in the years 1918-1919, it seemed
plausible that capitalism would soon be swept from the European continent
forever. Given the fact that European powers controlled the majority of Earth's
land surface at the time, such an event could have meant the end of capitalism
not just in Europe, but everywhere. Additionally, the Comintern, founded in
March 1919, began as an independent international organization of communists
from various countries around the world that evolved after the Russian Civil
War into an essentially Soviet-sponsored agency responsible for coordinating
the revolutionary overthrow of capitalism worldwide. With the prospect of world
revolution so close at hand, Marxists were dominated by a feeling of
overwhelming optimism, which in the end proved to be quite premature. The
European revolutions were crushed one by one, until eventually the Russian
revolutionaries found themselves to be the only survivors. Since they had been
relying on the idea that an underdeveloped and agrarian country like Russia
would be able to build socialism with help from successful revolutionary
governments in the more industrialized parts of Europe, they found themselves
in a crisis once it became clear that no such help would arrive; see "Socialism
in one country". After those events and up until the present day, the
international situation never came quite so close to a world revolution again.
As fascism grew in Europe in the 1930s, instead of immediate revolution, the
Comintern opted for a Popular Front with liberal capitalists against fascism;
then, at the height of World War II in 1943, the Comintern was disbanded on the
request of the Soviet Union's Western allies. Post World War Two. A new upsurge
of revolutionary feeling swept across Europe in the aftermath of World War II,
though it was not as strong as the one triggered by World War I which resulted
in failed (in the socialist sense) revolution in Germany and a successful one
(for seventy years) in Russia. Communist parties in countries such as Greece,
France, and Italy had acquired significant prestige and public support due to
their activity as leaders of anti-fascist resistance movements during the war;
as such, they also enjoyed considerable success at the polls and regularly
finished second in elections in the late 1940s. However, none managed to finish
in first and form a government. Communist parties in Eastern Europe, meanwhile,
though they did win elections at around the same time, did so under
circumstances regarded by some as mere show elections. Revolts across the world
in the 1960s and early 1970s, coupled with the Chinese Cultural Revolution, the
establishment of the New Left together with the Civil Rights Movement, the
militancy of the Black Panther Party and similar armed/insurrectionary
"Liberation Front" groups around the globe, and even a bit of a resurgence in
the labor movement for a time once again made it seem to some as though world
revolution was not only possible, but actually imminent; thus, there was a
common expression, "The East is Red, and the West is Ready". However, this
radical left spirit ebbed by the mid-1970s, and in 1980s and 1990s there was a
return to certain right-wing, economically conservative ideologies
(spearheaded, among other examples, by Thatcherism in the United Kingdom and
Reaganomics in the United States) and also free-market reforms in China and in
Vietnam. Within Marxist theory, Lenin's concept of the labor aristocracy and
his description of imperialism, andseparately, but not necessarily
unrelatedlyTrotsky's theories regarding the deformed workers' state, offer
several explanations as to why the world revolution has not occurred to the
present day. Many groups, however, such as the Progressive Labor Party (United
States), still explicitly pursue the goal of worldwide communist revolution,
calling it the truest expression of proletarian internationalism.
