X-inefficiency X-inefficiency is the difference between efficient behavior of
firms assumed or implied by economic theory and their observed behavior in
practice. It occurs when technical-efficiency is not being achieved due to a
lack of competitive pressure. The concepts of x-inefficiency were introduced by
Harvey Leibenstein. Economic theory assumes that the management of firms act to
maximize economic profits -- which is accomplished by adjusting the inputs used
or the output produced. In perfect competition, the free entry and exit of
firms tends toward firms producing at the point where price equals long run
average costs and long run average costs are minimized. Thus firms earn zero
"economic" profits and consumers pay a price equal to the marginal cost of
producing the good. This result defines economic efficiency or, more precisely,
allocative economic efficiency. Empirical research suggests, however, that a
number of firms do not produce at the point where long run average costs are
minimized. Some of this can be explained away by the mechanics of imperfect
competition; what cannot be explained by traditional economics is described as
X-inefficiency. With market forms other than perfect competition, such as
monopoly, it may be possible for x-inefficiency to persist, because the lack of
competition makes it possible to use inefficient production techniques and
still stay in business. In addition to monopoly, sociologists have identified a
number of ways in which markets may be organizationally embedded, and thus may
depart in behavior from economic theory. X-inefficiency is not the only type of
inefficiency in economics. X-inefficiency only looks at the outputs that are
produced with given inputs. It doesn't take account of whether the inputs are
the best ones to be using, or whether the outputs are the best ones to be
producing, which is referred to as allocative efficiency. For example, a firm
that employs brain surgeons to dig ditches might still be x-efficient, even
though reallocating the brain surgeons to curing the sick would be more
efficient for society overall. Examples. X-inefficiency can also occur when
monopolies or even oligopolies produce higher than the minimum average cost .
