Xenophon Xenophon (, "Xenophōn"; c. 430 – 354 BC), son of Gryllus, of the
deme Erchia of Athens, also known as Xenophon of Athens, was a Greek historian,
soldier, mercenary, philosopher and a contemporary and admirer of Socrates. He
is known for his writings on the history of his own times, the 4th century BC,
preserving the sayings of Socrates, and descriptions of life in ancient Greece
and the Persian Empire. Life and writings. Early years. Xenophon's birth date
is uncertain, but most scholars agree that he was born around 430 BC near the
city of Athens. Xenophon was born into the ranks of the upper classes, thus
granting him access to certain privileges of the aristocracy of ancient Attica.
While a young man, Xenophon participated in the expedition led by Cyrus the
Younger against his older brother, king Artaxerxes II of Persia, in 401 BC.
Xenophon writes that he had asked the veteran Socrates for advice on whether to
go with Cyrus, and that Socrates referred him to the divinely inspired Delphic
oracle. Xenophon's query to the oracle, however, was not whether or not to
accept Cyrus' invitation, but "to which of the gods he must pray and do
sacrifice, so that he might best accomplish his intended journey and return in
safety, with good fortune". The oracle answered his question and told him to
which gods to pray and sacrifice. When Xenophon returned to Athens and told
Socrates of the oracle's advice, Socrates chastised him for asking so
disingenuous a question. Under the pretext of fighting Tissaphernes, the
Persian satrap of Ionia, Cyrus assembled a massive army composed of native
Persian soldiers, but also a large number of Greeks. Prior to waging war
against Artaxerxes, Cyrus proposed that the enemy was the Pisidians, and so the
Greeks were unaware that they were to battle against the larger army of King
Artaxerxes II. At Tarsus the soldiers became aware of Cyrus's plans to depose
the king, and as a result, refused to continue. However, Clearchus, a Spartan
general, convinced the Greeks to continue with the expedition. The army of
Cyrus met the army of Artaxerxes II in the Battle of Cunaxa. Despite effective
fighting by the Greeks, Cyrus was killed in the battle. Shortly thereafter,
Clearchus was invited to a peace conference, where, alongside four other
generals and many captains, he was betrayed and executed. The mercenaries,
known as the Ten Thousand, found themselves without leadership far from the
sea, deep in hostile territory near the heart of Mesopotamia. They elected new
leaders, including Xenophon himself, and fought their way north through hostile
Persians and Medes to Trapezus on the coast of the Black Sea. They then made
their way westward back to Greece. Once there, they helped Seuthes II make
himself king of Thrace, before being recruited into the army of the Spartan
general Thibron. Xenophon's book "Anabasis" ("The Expedition" or "The March Up
Country") is his record of the entire expedition against the Persians and the
journey home. The "Anabasis" was used as a field guide by Alexander the Great
during the early phases of his expedition into Persia. Exile and death.
Xenophon was later exiled from Athens, most likely because he fought under the
Spartan king Agesilaus II against Athens at Coronea. However, there may have
been contributory causes, such as his support for Socrates, as well as the fact
that he had taken service with the Persians. The Spartans gave him property at
Scillus, near Olympia in Elis, where he composed the "Anabasis". However,
because his son Gryllus fought and died for Athens at the Battle of Mantinea
while Xenophon was still alive, Xenophon's banishment may have been revoked.
Xenophon died in either Corinth or Athens. His date of death is uncertain;
historians only know that he survived his patron Agesilaus II, for whom he
wrote an encomium. Xenophon had a fond love of Athens but didn't believe in its
political morals, which leads some to believe that he was an oligarch. Legacy.
Diogenes Laertius states that Xenophon was sometimes known as the "Attic Muse"
for the sweetness of his diction. Xenophon is often cited for promoting
sympathetic training and humane treatment of horses in his "On Horsemanship".
Xenophon's standing as a political philosopher has been defended in recent
times by Leo Strauss, who devoted a considerable part of his philosophic
analysis to the works of Xenophon, returning to the high judgment of Xenophon
as a thinker expressed by Shaftesbury, Winckelmann, Machiavelli, and John
Adams. Ponting cites Xenophon as one of the first thinkers to argue that the
ordered world must have been conceived by a god or gods. Xenophon's
"Memorabilia" poses the argument that all animals are "only produced and
nourished for the sake of humans". Though he spent much of his life in Athens,
Xenophon's involvement in Spartan politics (he was a close associate of King
Agesilaus II) has led to him being closely associated with the city. List of
works. Xenophon's writings, especially the "Anabasis", are often read by
beginning students of the Greek language. His "Hellenica" is a major primary
source for events in Greece from 411 to 362 BC, and is considered to be the
continuation of the "History of the Peloponnesian War" by Thucydides, going so
far as to begin with the phrase "Following these events...". The Hellenica
recounts the last seven years of the Peloponnesian war, as well as its
aftermath. His Socratic writings, preserved complete, along with the dialogues
of Plato, are the only surviving representatives of the genre of Sokratikoi
logoi. Short treatises. In addition, a short treatise on the Constitution of
Athens exists that was once thought to be by Xenophon, but which was probably
written when Xenophon was about five years old. The work is found in
manuscripts among the short works of Xenophon, as though he had written it
also. The author, often called in English the "Old Oligarch", detests the
democracy of Athens and the poorer classes, but he argues that the Periclean
institutions are well designed for their deplorable purposes.
