Netroots Nation Netroots Nation is a political convention for American
progressive political activists, originally organized by readers and writers of
Daily Kos, a liberal political blog. It was previously called YearlyKos. The
7th Annual Netroots Nation conference was held in Providence, Rhode Island from
June 7–10. Past conferences. 2006. The first YearlyKos was held in Las Vegas,
from June 8–11, 2006. It was held at the Riviera Hotel and Casino There were
1,200 attendees, and featured prominent Democrats such as Harry Reid, Howard
Dean, and Barbara Boxer, as well as three possible contenders in the 2008
Democratic primary: retired General Wesley Clark, New Mexico governor Bill
Richardson, and former Virginia governor Mark Warner. Laughing Liberally
provided comedy entertainment at the convention, with stand-up comics Lee Camp
and Baratunde Thurston, and George W. Bush impressionist James Adomian. Harry
Reid and Barbara Boxer addressed the convention, and Barbara Boxer referred to
the the Netroots. Wes Clarke and Mark Warner, seemingly exploring presidential
runs, met with the attendees, with Warner throwing a lavish party at the
Stratosphere. The convention also consisted of panels, roundtable discussion
groups, and other gatherings of activists, members of the media and elected
officials. Democracy for America and the Center for American Progress were
among the groups offering training sessions. Many of the panels were broadcast
on C-SPAN. The convention also received a significant amount of coverage in the
traditional media, including a write-up in the New York Times that said this
event “seems on its way to becoming as much a part of the Democratic
political circuit as the Iowa State Fair.” 2007. The 2007 YearlyKos was held
at the McCormick Place Convention Center in Chicago, Illinois from August
2–5. Seven of the eight major Democratic Presidential candidates attended the
Convention in a debate moderated by bloggers. The candidates were Hillary
Clinton, Chris Dodd, John Edwards, Mike Gravel, Dennis Kucinich, Barack Obama,
Bill Richardson. The most memorable moment was when Hillary Clinton refused to
join John Edwards and Barack Obama's pledge to stop taking money from
Washington lobbyists. Before and after the debate the candidates held their own
break-out sessions. Media coverage called out the emergence of the Netroots in
current political discourse (“Liberal bloggers can count the ways they are
making their presence felt in the presidential race.” –Chicago Tribune) and
beyond 2008 (“The Netroots appear to be here to stay. Much of the debate at
this year’s conference is aimed not at defining who the group is but rather
at on what the group should do in 2008 and beyond.” –Chris Cillizza,
Washington Post). House Speaker Nancy Pelosi and Senate Majority Leader Harry
Reid were expected to appear, but were held up in Washington due to various
votes. On Saturday night of the Convention, the U.S. House of Representatives
passed the controversial FISA legislation to expand George W. Bush's powers.
2008. After rebranding to Netroots Nation to better reflect the growing
influence and membership of the netroots as a whole rather than just Daily Kos,
the 2008 convention was held in Austin, Texas at the Austin Convention Center
from July 17–20. Prominent speakers in 2008 included Speaker of the House
Nancy Pelosi who was joined on stage by a surprise guest, former Vice President
Al Gore. Other prominent speakers included Gov. Howard Dean, Harold Ford,
Lawrence Lessig, Rep. Donna Edwards and Van Jones. On Saturday night, Gina
Cooper announced the end of her tenure as Director of Netroots Nation. 2009. In
2009, Netroots Nation was held at Pittsburgh's David L. Lawrence Convention
Center, on August 13–16. Pittsburgh was chosen in part because it is a leader
in LEED Certified green building technology; it has more square footage of
green buildings than any other city in the country. Another reason was
Pittsburgh's rich labor union history. Prominent speakers included President
Bill Clinton, Valerie Jarrett, former Vermont Gov. Howard Dean, SEIU's Anna
Burger, former New Jersey Governor Jon Corzine and Dean Baker. There was also a
debate between Pennsylvania Senate candidates Rep. Joe Sestak and Sen. Arlen
Specter. The keynote speaker was former US President Bill Clinton. The event
captured international headlines when the Democratic Congressional leadership
seemingly abandoned the "public option" during the Health Care debate and
Howard Dean spoke forcefully that the party would reconsider this issue and not
compromise on it. Former President Bill Clinton also made headlines in
Pittsburgh when responding to a question shouted at him during his speech,
concerning gay rights and the military. Clinton quipped at a shouting audience
member, "You know you should go to one of those Congressional health care
meetings," and went on to say that the implementation of the policy was not
what he envisioned or how it was originally defined and that it was ridiculous
that $150,000 was spent "to get rid of an Arabic translator" and that 130
servicemen and -women known to be gay were allowed to serve in the first Gulf
War until "they kicked them out." 2010. The 2010 Netroots Nation conference was
held in the Las Vegas Valley at the Rio All Suite Hotel and Casino. About 2,200
attended the conference. More than 200 media covered this year's conference
including CNN, Univision, AP, Politico and many others. There were 70 panels,
screening series and a Campaign Academy with 30 hands-on training sessions.
These trainings, organized with the help of Democracy for America, featured
professionals from dozens of organizations and publications in the progressive
movement. Along with the panels and trainings there were seven keynote
sessions. Two of the keynotes were question-and-answer sessions: Ask the
Speaker with Speaker Nancy Pelosi and Ask the Leader with Majority Leader Harry
Reid. A memorable moment came when Sen. Harry Reid made an on-stage promise to
Lt. Dan Choi to repeal Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell. Prominent speakers included
Speaker Nancy Pelosi, Majority Leader Harry Reid, Sen.Al Franken, Secretary of
Transportation Ray LaHood, Elizabeth Warren, Gov. Brian Schweitzer, Ed Schultz,
Sen. Jeff Merkley, Sen. Ben Cardin, Sen. Tom Udall, Rep.Alan Grayson, Rep. Raul
Grijalva, Rep. Jared Polis, Rep. Donna Edwards, Rep.Jerrold Nadler, Van Jones,
Rich Trumka, Tim Wise, Lizz Winstead, Majora Carter, Markos Moulitsas, Tarryl
Clark, Bill Halter, Phaedra Ellis-Lamkins, Gerald McEntee and Eliseo Medina.
During his speech, Sen. Franken argued against media consolidation and for net
neutrality laws. He said, in part, "If we don't protect Net Neutrality now, how
long do you think it will take before Comcast-NBC Universal, or Verizon-CBS
Viacom or AT&T-ABC-DirecTV or BP-Haliburton-Walmart-Fox-Domino's-Pizza start
favoring its content over everyone else's?" 2011. The 2011 Netroots Nation was
held June 16–19 in Minneapolis, Minnesota, and drew its largest crowd ever:
more than 2400. Prominent featured speakers included Rep. Debbie Wasserman-
Schultz, former Senator Russ Feingold, Minneapolis mayor R. T. Rybak, former
Vermont governor Howard Dean, Van Jones, White House Communications Director
Daniel Pfeiffer, John Aravosis, Shannon Augare, Senator Mark Begich, Senator
Ben Cardin, Rep. Judy Chu, Lt. Dan Choi, Rep. Keith Ellison, Tarryl Clark, Dr.
Heidi Cullen, Rep. Donna Edwards, Maj. Gen. Paul Eaton, Laura Flanders, Sen. Al
Franken, Rep. John Garamendi, Rep. Luis Gutierrez, Jane Hamsher and Montana
State Rep. Ellie Hill. Netroots Nation 2011 also had an international presence,
with bloggers and activists from 24 countries—including Germany, Morocco,
Yemen, Iran, Kyrgyzstan, Afghanistan and China—participating. The conference
culminated with the first ever Freedom from Fear Awards program, which
highlighted fearless immigration activism and featured an original song from
Jill Sobule. 2012. Netroots Nation 2012 was held June 7–10 in Providence,
Rhode Island at the Rhode Island Convention Center. Prominent featured speakers
included Rebuild the Dream co-founder Van Jones, NAACP President Benjamin
Jealous, Congressman David Cicilline (RI-01), winner of the Sveriges Riksbank
Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel, Paul Krugman, Carol Shea-
Porter, AFL-CIO’s Rich Trumka, the Agenda Project’s Erica Payne, Ai-jen Poo
- National Domestic Workers Alliance director, and Rhode Island State
Representatives Teresa Tanzi and Chuck Rocha.
