Yield (finance) In finance, the term yield describes the amount in cash that
returns to the owners of a security. Normally it does not include the price
variations, at the difference of the total return. Yield applies to various
stated rates of return on stocks (common and preferred, and convertible), fixed
income instruments (bonds, notes, bills, strips, zero coupon), and some other
investment type insurance products (e.g. annuities). The term is used in
different situations to mean different things. It can be calculated as a ratio
or as an internal rate of return (IRR). It may be used to state the owner's
total return, or just a portion of income, or exceed the income. Because of
these differences, the yields from different uses should never be compared as
if they were equal. This page is mainly a series of links to other pages with
increased details. Bonds, notes, bills. The nominal yield or coupon yield is
the yearly total of coupons (or interest) paid divided by the Principal (Face)
Value of the bond. The current yield is those same payments divided by the
bond's spot market price. The yield to maturity is the IRR on the bond's cash
flows: the purchase price, the coupons received and the principal at maturity.
The yield to call is the IRR on the bond's cash flows, assuming it is called at
the first opportunity, instead of being held till maturity. The yield of a bond
is inversely related to its price today: if the price of a bond falls, its
yield goes up. Conversely, if interest rates decline (the market yield
declines), then the price of the bond should rise (all else being equal). There
is also TIPS (Treasury Inflation Protected Securities), also known as Inflation
Linked fixed income. TIPS are sold by the US Treasury and have a "real yield".
The bond or note's face value is adjusted upwards with the CPI-U, and a real
yield is applied to the adjusted principal to let the investor always
outperform the inflation rate and protect purchasing power. However, many
economists believe that the CPI under-represents actual inflation. In the event
of deflation over the life of this type of fixed income, TIPS still mature at
the price at which they were sold (initial face). Losing money on TIPS if
bought at the initial auction and held to maturity is not possible even if
deflation was long lasting. Preferred shares. Like bonds, preferred shares
compensate owners with scheduled payments which resemble interest. However,
preferred "interest" is actually in the form of a dividend. This is a
significant accounting difference as preferred dividends, unlike debt interest,
are charged after taxes and below net income, therefore reducing net income and
ultimately earnings per share. Preferred shares may also contain conversion
privileges which allow for their exchange into common stock. The dividend yield
is the total yearly payments divided by the principal value of the preferred
share. The current yield is those same payments divided by the preferred
share's market price. If the preferred share has a maturity (not always) there
can also be a yield to maturity and yield to call calculated, the same way as
for bonds. Preferred trust units. Like preferred shares but units in a trust.
Trusts have certain tax advantages to standard corporations and are typically
deemed to be "flow-through" vehicles. Private mutual funds trusts are gaining
in popularity in Canada following the changes to tax legislation which forced
many publicly traded royalty trusts to convert back into corporations.
Investors seeking the high yields typically associated with the energy royalty
trusts are increasingly investing in private mutual energy fund trusts. Common
shares. Common shares will often pay out a portion of the earnings as
dividends. The dividend yield is the total dollars (Yen, etc.) paid in a year
divided by the spot price of the shares. Most web sites and reports are updated
with the expected future year's payments, not the past year's. The price/
earnings ratio quoted for common shares is the reciprocal of what is called the
earnings yield. EarningsPerShare / SharePrice. Annuities. The life annuities
purchased to fund retirement pay out a higher yield than can be obtained with
other instruments, because part of the payment comes from a return of capital.
$YearlyDistribution / $CostOfContract. REITs, royalty trust, income trusts.
Like annuities, distribution yields from REITs, Royalty trusts, and Income
trusts often include cash that exceeds the income earned: that is return of
capital. $YearlyDistribution / $SharePrice. Real Estate & Property. Several
different yields are used as measures of a real estate investment, including
initial, equivalent and reversionary yields. Initial Yield is the annualised
rents of a property expressed as a percentage of the property value. E.g.
£100,000 passing rent per annum £1,850,000 valuation 100000/1850000 = 0.054
or 5.4% Reversionary Yield is the anticipated yield to which the initial yield
will rise (or fall) once the rent reaches the ERV. E.g. £150,000 ERV per annum
£1,850,000 valuation 150000/1850000 = 0.081 or 8.1% Equivalent Yield lies
somewhere in between the initial yield and reversionary yield, it encapsulates
the DCF of the property with rents rising (or falling) from the current
annualised rent to the underlying estimated rental value (ERV) less costs that
are incurred along the way. The discount rate used to calculate the net present
value (NPV) of the DCF to equal zero is the equivalent yield, or the IRR. The
calculation not only takes in to account all costs, but other assumptions
including rent reviews and void periods. A trial and error method can be used
to identify the equivalent yield of a DCF, or if using Excel, the goal seek
function can be used. How to evaluate the yield (%). All financial instruments
compete with each other in the market place. Yield is one part of the total
return of holding a security. A higher yield allows the owner to recoup his
investment sooner, and so lessens risk. But on the other hand, a high yield may
have resulted from a falling market value for the security as a result of
higher risk. Yield levels vary mainly with expectations of inflation. Fears of
high inflation in the future mean that investors ask for high yield (a low
price vs the coupon) today. The maturity of the instrument is one of the
elements that determines risk. The relationship between yields and the maturity
of instruments of similar credit worthiness, is described by the yield curve.
Long dated instruments typically have a higher yield than short dated
instruments. The yield of a debt instrument is generally linked to the credit
worthiness and default probability of the issuer. The more the default risk,
the higher the yield would be in most of the cases since issuers need to offer
investors some compensation for the risk.
