Young Lords The Young Lords, later Young Lords Organization and in New York
(notably Spanish Harlem), Young Lords Party, was a Puerto Rican nationalist
group in several United States cities, notably New York City and Chicago.
Founding. The Young Lords began as a Chicago turf gang in the 1960s in the
Lincoln Park neighborhood. When they realized that urban renewal was evicting
their families and saw police abuses, some like other Puerto Ricans became
involved in the June 1966 Division Street Riots in Wicker Park and Humboldt
Park. A couple of years later they reorganized themselves as a human rights
movement officially, on September 23,1968. Puerto Rican self determination and
Gentrification or displacement became the primary focus early on in Chicago due
to Mayor Daley's ruthless patronage machine that eventually evicted the entire
Puerto Rican and several Mexican communities of that city from prime real
estate, near downtown and near the lakefront areas. On July 26, 1969, a New
York regional chapter accepted neighborhood empowerment and Puerto Rico self
determination as the unifying mission and was joined. The New York Chapter was
sanctioned as the regional center of the Young Lords, after the entire Young
Lords Organization gained national prominence leading protests against
conditions faced by Puerto Ricans that lead to several takeovers nationally. In
New York there was the takeover of the First Spanish Methodist Church in East
Harlem on December 28, 1969. This was soon after September 1969, when the
United Methodist Pastor Rev. Bruce Johnson and his wife Eugenia of the Chicago
People's Church, where the Young Lords national headquarters was established in
an earlier May,1969 church occupation, were both discovered stabbed repeatedly
in their parsonage home.Rev. Bruce Johnson was stabbed 14 times and Eugenia 19
times in a cold case that has never been solved. There was much resentment
toward Rev. Bruce Johnson and his wife Eugenia because of their strong
commitment to the Young Lords and the Puerto Ricans being displaced from the
Lincoln Park neighborhood. A major service was held led by Bishop Pryor, the
Northside Cooperative Ministry, Lincoln Park Poor People's Coalition and the
Young Lords. According to a reporter, William C. Henzlik, Young Lords founder,
Jose Cha Cha Jimenez was in Cook County Jail for a new charge of alleged bond
jumping, at the time of the murders. A bail bond drive organized among
churchmen enabled Cha-Cha Jimenez to leave the jail in time to tell worshipers:
"Rev. Bruce Johnson came down from the mountaintops of the rich to be with the
poor people... most people are like boats in a harbor, always tied up to the
dock. Bruce and Eugenia Johnson left the safe harbor and tried to cross the
ocean." The organization drew front page headlines in new left tabloids,the
national and local media. This was primarily due to the Young Lords ability to
organize and to bring thousands of people to their actions. It was also because
of the existence of chapters in various cities from the mid west to both
coasts. The growth of the New York chapter,where one fourth of most Puerto
Ricans then lived and the Chicago national office, where they originated and
had become another Puerto Rican hub during the Great Puerto Rican Migration of
the 1950's, led to the opening of more new branches including: Philadelphia,
Bridgeport, Newark, Milwaukee, Los Angeles, Hayward and other Puerto Rican hub
cities. By March 1970, the Young Lords also opened up a South Bronx Information
Center, establishing "Pa'lante", a newspaper later printed and distributed in
New York by the Young Lords. Geraldo Rivera a lawyer and later a journalist who
while never an official member was committed to supporting the Young Lords
Party. By May 1970, the New York section under the leadership of its Central
Committee: Felipe Luciano, Chairman; David Perez, Minister of Defense; Juan
González, Minister of Education; Pablo Guzmán, Minister of Information; Juan
Fi Ortiz, Minister of Finance; and Denise Oliver, Field Marshall, decided to
separate from the Chicago Young Lords. This had begun only as a personal
difference between two individuals Andre Nunez and Yoruba Guzman and then
explained as an ideological difference. In fact, to this day there are no
differences in politics or actions, except regional and the personal conflict
was tossed to the wayside as being less significant than libertyfor Puerto
Rico. The New York entity was then renamed the Young Lords Party. But even then
the separation was not a hostile one, New York was also the eastern regional
chapter and it collected several east coast groups. All the other groups
remained with Chicago. A similar situation was taking place at the same time
within the Black Panther Party, Students for a Democratic Society and many
other new left movements. Most were believed to be growing pains, shaped also
in part by the ongoing undercover work of the FBI's COINTELPRO. Repression
became rampant in all these organizations.Frame-ups, beatings, killings,
jailings, infiltrations and negative rumour campaigns were launched against the
leadership, along with high bonds and these creation of divisions. The Young
Lords as a movement continued to focus its activity around Independence for
Puerto Rico and the struggle for democratic rights for all Puerto Ricans and
Latinos and poor, along with the empowerment of all barrios within the United
States. The local aspect of mission was significant because the Young Lords saw
themselves as a People's Struggle. Therefore the original issue that turned the
Young Lords in Chicago into a bonafide human rights movement was the complete
destruction and displacement of an entire Puerto Rican community in Lincoln
Park, Chicago. They were also the first large barrio of the first Puerto Rican
immigrants to Chicago. In New York the "Garbage Offensive" was utilized as an
organizing vehicle or their local city service issue. Other key local
organizing issues brought forward by the Young Lords, included: police
injustice, health care, tenant's rights,free breakfast for children, free day
care, and accurate Latino education. The Young Lords grew in numbers and
influence from 1968 to 1983. Their influence extended beyond politics, as the
Young Lords inspired political leaders, professionals and artists, forming part
of a Puerto Rican cultural renaissance in the 1970s nationally within the
continental United States.In New York it was known as the Nuyorican Movement
which also included poetry and music. Felipe Luciano, already a well-known poet
within black liberation circles in Harlem, recited many of his well-known poems
he wrote while a member of The Last Poets: Jibaro, Un Rifle Oración, Hey Now.
Pedro Pietri wrote and publicly recited his best known poems, "Puerto Rican
Obituary" and "Suicide Note of a Cockroach in a Low Income Project", at Young
Lord events. The song "Qué Bonita Bandera" ("What a Beautiful Flag") was
written by Pepe y Flora in Puerto Rico and was adopted by Chicago's national
office as the Young Lords anthem. It was sung live many times during the take-
over of McCormick Theological Seminary and the People's Church in Chicago's
Lincoln Park Neighborhood and in New York's People's Church in Spanish Harlem.
The impact on music was even more significant as groups such as Eddie Palmieri,
Ray Barreto, Willie Colón, and others began to write and perform songs that
addressed the Puerto Rican experience. Expansion. Subsequent branches were also
organized in Philadelphia, Connecticut, New Jersey, Boston, Milwaukee, Hayward,
California, San Diego, Los Angeles, and Puerto Rico. The Young Lords set up
many community projects similar to those of the Black Panthers but with a
Latino flavor, such as the free breakfast program for children, Emeterio
Betances free health clinic, community testing for tuberculosis, lead poisoning
testing, free clothing drives, cultural events and Puerto Rican history
classes. In Chicago, they also set up a free dental clinic and a free community
day care center. There was also work on prison solidarity for incarcerated
Puerto Ricans and for the rights of Vietnam War veterans. The female leadership
in New York pushed the Young Lords to fight for women's rights. In Chicago, it
was a sub-group within the Young Lords led by Hilda Ignatin, Judy Cordero and
Angela Adorno called (M.A.O.) Mothers And Others, that organized around women's
rights and helped to educate the male members and the community at large. Their
newspapers, "The Young Lord", "Pitirre", and "Palante" (a contraction of ""Para
adelante"", "Forward"), reported on their increasingly militant activities. The
Young Lords carried out many direct action occupations of vacant land,
hospitals, churches and other institutions to demand that they operate programs
for the poor. This included a campaign to force the City of New York to
increase garbage pick-up in Spanish Harlem. In Chicago, the seven day McCormick
Theological Seminary take-over, won the Lincoln Park residents $650,000 to be
used for low-income housing. The four-month People's Park camp out/take over,
at Halsted and Armitage Avenue by 350 community residents, prevented the
construction of a for-profit tennis court where low-income persons once stood.
In New York, much of their local health care activism was carried out by a mass
organization they formed with the Black Panthers known as the Health
Revolutionary Unity Movement (HRUM). In Chicago, the Young Lords health program
was coordinated by Dr. Jack Johns, Quentin Young, Ana Lucas, and Alberto and
Marta Chavarria who also worked with a Black Panther-led coalition to recruit
medical student organizations like the Medical Committee for Human Rights
(MCHR) which advocated for health care for the poor. Besides the Black
Panthers, of whom they were organized into the Rainbow Coalition by Fred
Hampton of Chicago, the Young Lords were also influenced by groups such as the
Chicano Brown Berets, Crusade for Justice, Black Berets, Rising Up Angry, SDS,
M.P.I., Puerto Rican Nationalist Party, P.I.P., the Communist Party USA, the
East Asian-American Red Guards, Damas y Caballeros de San Juan, as well as many
local community activists. As for the Puerto Rican island, the Young Lords
began organizing conferences and marches calling for Puerto Rican independence,
which was always related back to their natural operating bases and the
gentrification that they were fighting within it, in the streets of Lincoln
Park, Chicago, Manhattan and other cities. The Young Lords grew into a national
movement, through the leadership of activists like Angela Adorno who met with
Vietnamese women, Omar Lopez (currently involved nationally with immigrant
rights), and Richie Perez who established the Puerto Rican Student Union (PRSU)
in a number of college campuses and high schools. They also became one of the
leading targets of the FBI's COINTELPRO, which had long harassed Puerto Rican
groups. The founder and Chairman, Jose Cha Cha Jimenez was indicted 18 times in
a six-week period ranging from assaults and battery on police to mob actions.
He was kept in the county jail, or in court rooms fighting the charges, and
lived with constant death threats. While the Young Lords advocated similar
armed strategies to those advocated by the Black Panthers, it was as a right of
self-defense that rarely arose, as it did after the shooting of Manuel Ramos,
the Police implications in the circumstances surrounding the beating death of
Jose (Pancho) Lind, the supposed suicide of Julio Roldan in the custody of the
NYPD and the fatal stabbings in Chicago of the Methodist Rev. Bruce Johnson and
his wife Eugenia, who pastored the Lincoln Park Community at the Young Lord's
first People's Church. Decline and aftermath. By 1973, the Young Lords had been
crippled and had all but been destroyed by the FBI's discreditations and
divide-and-conquer tactics of COINTELPRO and other government investigative
agencies. Still, many members continued to pursue their vision for self-
determination for Puerto Rico and other nations, as well as for neighborhood
empowerment. In Chicago, the Young Lords resurfaced after two and a half years
of being forced underground by repression from groups like the Gang
Intelligence Unit, the Red Squad and COINTELPRO. At that time Jose Cha Cha
Jimenez who had been living underground for two and a half years, turned
himself in to the police on December 4, 1972, exactly three years to the date,
after the infamous police raid that killed Fred Hampton and Mark Clark of the
Illinois chapter of the Black Panther Party. He immediately began serving a
one-year sentence in Cook County Jail. This was right after helping to run an
underground training school for new Young Lords leadership. After his release
from the year in jail, the Young Lords ran the 1975 aldermanic campaign for
Jose Cha Cha Jimenez . It garnered 39% of the vote against Mayor Richard J.
Daley's political machine candidate, Chris Cohen. The campaign followed the
example of Bobby Seale of the Black Panthers who was then running for mayor of
Oakland,California; and was viewed only as "an organizing vehicle for change,"
to bring out the urban renewal displacement concerns of the community. After
the aldermanic campaign, Cha-Cha Jimenez was incarcerated for another nine
months, awaiting trial on an alleged hostage charge to show support for the
FALN.The case was thrown out of court due to no evidence and the Speedy Trial
law. The Young Lords in 1982 in Chicago, became the first Latino group to join
with and to organize a major event for the successful campaign of the first
African American mayor, Harold Washington. Soon after Mayor Harold Washington
won, Jose Cha Cha Jimenez who was the only one on stage with him, introduced
Washington before a June, 1983 crowd of 100,000 Puerto Ricans (that the Young
Lords helped to organize) in Humboldt Park. That day the Young Lords gave out
30,000 buttons with "Tengo Puerto Rico En Mi Corazon" inscribed on them. In the
fall of 1995, Chicago Young Lords' Tony Baez, Carlos Flores, Angel Del Rivero,
Omar Lopez and Angie Adorno were brought together again by Cha-Cha Jimenez, to
form the Lincoln Park Project. They began to archive Young Lords history and to
document the displaced Latinos and the poor of the Lincoln Park neighborhood.
To show support for the Puerto Rican Vieques campers and to continue the
struggle for Puerto Rican independence and against the internal displacement of
Puerto Ricans and other poor within the Diaspora, the Young Lords organized
Lincoln Park Camp on September 23, 2002 near Grand Rapids,MI. Many Young Lords
showed support for the freed Puerto Rican nationalist leaders and urban
guerrilla groups like the Macheteros. Still others moved on to more explicitly
Maoist formations, like the Puerto Rican Revolutionary Workers Party; and
others went on to provide the leadership of the National Congress for Puerto
Rican Rights (NCPRR). Some worked within the media, such as Juan González of
the "New York Daily News" and "Democracy Now!", Pablo "Yoruba" Guzman at WCBS-
TV New York, Felipe Luciano and Miguel "Mickey" Melendez of WBAI-FM New York.
The documentary "Palante, Siempre Palante! The Young Lords", produced by Young
Lord Iris Morales, aired on PBS in 1996.
