Youth vote The youth vote is a political term used primarily in the United
States to describe 18 to 29-year-olds and their voting habits. The term "Youth
Vote" goes back to the 1930s, when low-income rural and urban young people in
the United States were first mobilized to vote in blocs by the youth activism
movement. Their issues were largely related to joblessness, homelessness,
education, and guaranteed income. While youth were alternately activated and
suppressed in their voting habits through the 1950s, the early 1960s saw a
renewed interest in encouraging young peoples' progressive voting habits. When
Students for a Democratic Society put out a global call to action for youth via
the Port Huron Statement, millions of youth around the world reacted. A variety
of youth voting efforts sprung up across Europe, Asia, South America, and
Africa. The United States experienced a massive upsurge in youth civic action
of all sorts, with a particular emphasis on the youth vote. A variety of
organizations, including the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, the
Black Panthers, the Young Lords, and Youth Liberation of Ann Arbor each worked
to encourage young people to vote together and for common issues. The number of
young voters in the 2008 US presidential election has tripled, even quadrupled
in some states compared to the 2004 elections. In his "Time Magazine" article
"why Young Voters Care Again" David Von Drehle reports that "Obama drew more
under-30 voters than all Republican candidates combined in South Carolina."
Therefore, not only are more young voters turning out to vote, but many of them
are voting for Obama. New technology, the internet especially, is making it
easier for candidates to reach the youth and, in turn, more young people are
voting. Websites such as Facebook and YouTube not only allow students who don't
subscribe to newspapers or watch the evening news stay on top of the polls, but
also allows them to share their excitement over the polls and candidates.
Today, a number of organizations proclaim their commitment to garnering the
youth voice. They include Our Time, Rock the Vote, League of Young Voters, 18
in '08, Center for Information and Research on Civic Learning and Engagement
(CIRCLE), Declare Yourself, Young Voter PAC, WWE Smackdown Your Vote, the New
York Public Interest Research Group (NYPIRG), Headcount and YouthVote USA. A
2008 poll has concluded a possible dramatic drop by young voters in the 2008
Canadian election. The poll found that only about 50% of respondents would
vote. This was down from the 2006 Canadian election in which 57% of youths
voted.
