Youth council Youth councils are a form of youth voice engaged in community
decision-making. Youth councils exist on local, state, provincial, regional,
national, and international levels among governments, NGOs, schools, and other
entities. About. The history of youth councils extends back to the early 20th
century, when communists and Nazis formed youth-led decision-making bodies for
the purpose of propaganization and recruitment. Youth councils have seen a
resurgence in Western Europe under the advisement of the European Youth Forum;
in the United States and Canada organizations such as The Freechild Project and
Points of Light Foundation have been instrumental. Article 12 of the Convention
on the Rights of the Child is also widely credited with promoting youth
councils. Youth councils have many purposes. Many are consultative bodies for
more representative political bodies at all levels of government. The extent to
which they have been established at all levels varies, as the United States,
Canada, Western and Northern Europe have all seen a proliferation of these
bodies. How they are composed varies, with some youth councils being elected by
young people in the community, while others are handpicked by political
officials or elected by youth NGOs. Examples of youth councils. Europe. In
Europe there is a consolidated tradition of representative youth platforms at
Pan-regional, National and local level. At European level the European Youth
Forum constitutes the platforms which gathers more than 93 National Youth
Council and International Non-Governmental Youth Organizations. It's a non-
governmental structure which serves its members and applies the principles of
democratic representation, transparency through its internal democratic system
(election of the board and the president). At the Institutional level, the
Council of Europe has a specific co-managed system to run its youth sector.
Governmental and non-Governmental representative co-decide upon the priorities
of the youth program of the institution and they also co-manage the activities
which are run in two youth centres in Strasbourg and Budapest. The Youth
Constituency is called "Advisory Council on Youth" (AC) beside the co-decision
mechanism internal to the Directorate for Youth and Sport has the possibility
to advise the Institution on any matter which affect young people and which is
tackled by Council of Europe. At National level there are National Youth
Councils which are similar structures to the European Youth Forum and often
there are regional and local council which adopts various kind of
constituencies and organizations case by case an example of which is the
Scottish Youth Parliament. Another example is the PAL-TIN, which is a national
alliance of local youth councils in Romania. Additionally, some youth councils,
for example the Greek Youth Parliament allows for the participation not only of
youth from within the country, but also countries with large Greek communities
such as Germany and Australia. Among 1800 local youth and children's councils
exist in France. 500 are members of an umbrella born in 1991 and called Anacej
(National Association of youth and children councils) Middle East. In Israel,
There is a National Youth Council, whose members are elected from 7 Regional
Youth Councils, which are elected from Municipal councils, formed from
representatives of School Student Councils and Youth Movements. North America.
In the United States and Canada, youth councils have been formed by nonprofit
organizations and at all levels of government. Many cities, including Boston,
Los Angeles, San Francisco, Chicago, Miami, Houston, Dallas, Seattle, and San
Jose, California, have active youth councils that inform city government
decision-making. For instance, the Los Angeles Youth Council is sponsored by
the Commission for Children Youth and their Families. Prior to being
established as a program of this commission, it was operated as Mayor Tom
Bradley's Youth Advisory Board. This Youth Council is currently working on
creating a citywide Youth Policy. Several state-level government agencies and
legislatures have created youth councils, including Washington, Maine, Iowa,
Indiana, Louisiana, New Mexico, Massachusetts, and New Hampshire. Maine's
council was the first statewide youth council created in the US, and the others
were created soon after that. In the United States there are several forms of
youth councils. They include youth advisory councils, which provide input and
feedback regarding adult-driven decision-making; youth research councils that
are responsible for assessment and evaluation of youth and community programs,
and; youth action councils which are designed to either be youth/adult
partnerships or youth-led activities that are youth-driven and generally,
youth-focused. A new breed of Youth Council also exists that include a
perspective on "leadership", which is not always interpreted in the same way
from one generation to the next. This form of Youth Council embraces all of the
above mentioned qualities; advisory, assessment & evaluation skills & the
importance of partnering etc., as well as the "traditional consideration" of
gaining access to what timeless knowledge that may still be of value and, in
theory, the effect of "the path of leadership on our current leaders" and what
kind of examples there are to study (if any) and capitalize/maximize of what is
worthy and on-going. As in all generations, Youth have the same
responsibilities/concerns in: learning to work together, creating stability/
sustainability, a future for their children etc. This generation's challenges
will need all the skills of leadership on top of returning back to what it is
to be a true Human Being. Asia. In the Philippines, the "Sangguniang Kabataan"
is the main national youth council. It has a chairman and members of the
council whom to be elected by registered voters in the barangay. Each chairman
are entitled to become part as members of the Federation which will serve as
member (ex-officio) in the local legislative bodies except for the National
Federation. It has indirect supervision by NYC Philippines. Formerly known as
Kabataang Barangay (KB).
