Youth politics Youth politics is a category of issues which distinctly involve,
affect or otherwise impact youth. History. USA. With roots in the early youth
activism of the Newsboys and Mother Jones' child labor protests at the turn of
the 20th century, youth politics were first identified in American politics
with the formation of the American Youth Congress in the 1930s. In the 1950s
and 60s organizations such as the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee and
Students for a Democratic Society were closely associated with youth politics,
despite the broad social statements of documents including the liberal Port
Huron Statement and the conservative Sharon Statement and leaders such as Dr.
Martin Luther King, Jr.. Other late-period figures associated with youth
politics include Tom Hayden, Marian Wright Edelman and Bill Clinton. Europe.
Youth politics have an extensive history in Europe, as well. Free German Youth
was founded in 1936 as a communist alternative to the Nazi Youth movement. In
the UK there is a strong youth politics movement, consisting primarily of the
British Youth Council, the UK Youth Parliament and the Scottish Youth
Parliament. Although they have no direct power, the young people in these
organisations have a close working relationship with Members of Parliament and
are fairly influential, albeit ineffectual at bringing about direct change or
tangible objectives. Globally. Other continents have experienced a variety of
youth politics and political movements. In the recent Mexico’s presidence
election another manifestation of how the youth take the politics in the actual
world were see, the students movement called “Yo soy 132” made a very
notory change in how the elections developed, showing proofs of the electoral
fraud they thought will happen, they changed the percentage of acceptation of
the PRI candidate, Enrique Peña Nieto and they achieved to decrease it around
12 percentage points between the highest poll results for the candidate and the
final results of the elections. Present. Between the influence of mainstream
media and politicians, youth politics in the United States has been
illegitimated and deprioritized. Organizations such as National Youth Rights
Association and The Freechild Project continue to advocate and educate for
issues that affect young people specifically, while other organizations,
including Youth Service America and Advocates for Youth work for issues that
affect youth directly. The children's rights movement is widely credited with
keeping youth politics on the national radar, while other fledgling movements
such as youth voice and youth participation have yet to gain the spotlight.Even
with the efforts of these organizations, many college students do not see
politics as an important part of their lives. Only 33% of college freshman
think being knowledgeable about politics to be important. Data collected in by
the National Center for Education Statistics found that overall young Americans
care more about entertainment and sports than political and foreign news.
Despite these statistics there is a positive outlook on youth involvement in
the future because of the 2008 election when President Barack Obama ran. List
of current youth politics issues. There are several issues which are deemed
"youth politics" by politicians, mainstream media and other sources. List of
current youth politics organizations. There are thousands of youth politics
organizations and programs around the world.
