LGBT culture LGBT culture is a culture shared by lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender, and queer (LGBTQ) people. It is sometimes also referred to as
Queer culture. The term gay culture, though not synonymous, is sometimes also
used even though this may also apply specifically to a culture of homosexual
men. Not all LGBT people identify by or affiliate with LGBT culture. Reasons
can include geographic distance, unawareness of the subculture's existence,
fear of social stigma, or personal preference to remain unidentified with
sexuality or gender based subcultures or communities. The Queercore movement,
as well as the group Gay shame, critiques what they see as the
commercialization and self-imposed "ghettoization" of LGBT cultures. In some
cities, especially in North America, LGBTQ people live in gay villages
neighbourhoods with a high proportion of gay residents. LGBTQ communities
organize a number of events to celebrate their cultures, such as Pride parades,
the Gay Games and Southern Decadence. Gay male culture. According to Herdt,
"homosexuality" was the main term used until the late 1950s and early 1960s.
After this point, a new "gay" culture emerged. "This new gay culture
increasingly marks a full spectrum of social life: not only same-sex desires
but gay selves, gay neighbors, and gay social practices that are distinctive of
our affluent, postindustrial society". During the 19th and early 20th
centuries, gay culture was highly covert and relied upon secret symbols and
codes woven into an overall straight context. Gay influence in early America
was mostly limited to high culture. The association of gay men with opera,
ballet, couture, fine cuisine, musical theater, the Golden Age of Hollywood,
and interior design began with wealthy homosexual men using the straight themes
of these media to send their own signals. In the very heterocentric Marilyn
Monroe film "Gentlemen Prefer Blondes", a musical number features Jane Russell
singing "Anyone Here for Love" in a gym while muscled men dance around her. The
men's costumes were designed by a man, the dance was choreographed by a man,
and the dancers, as gay screenwriter Paul Rudnick points out, "seem more
interested in each other than in Russell", but her reassuring presence gets the
sequence past the censors and fits it into an overall heterocentric theme.
After the Stonewall riots in the United States in 1969, gay male culture began
to be publicly acknowledged for the first time. Some gay men formed The Violet
Quill society, which focused on writing about gay experience as something
central and normal in a story for the first time, rather than as a "naughty"
sideline to a mostly straight story. A good example is the short story "A Boy's
Own Story" by Edmund White. In this first volume of a trilogy, White writes as
a young homophilic narrator growing up under the shadow of a corrupt and remote
father. The young man learns bad habits from his straight father and applies
them to a gay existence. Celebrities such as Liza Minnelli, Jane Fonda, and
Bette Midler spent a significant amount of their social time with urban gay
men, who were now popularly viewed as sophisticated and stylish by the jet set.
And more celebrities themselves, such as Andy Warhol, were open about their
relationships. Such openness was still limited to the largest and most
progressive urban areas such as New York City, San Francisco, Los Angeles,
Seattle, Chicago, Dallas, Houston, Atlanta, Miami, Boston, Washington DC, New
Orleans, and Philadelphia, however, until AIDS forced several popular
celebrities out of the closet due to their contraction of what was known at
first as a "gay cancer". There are a number of subcultures within gay male
culture, such as the bears and chubbies. There are also subcultures that have
historically had a large gay male population, such as the leather and SM
subcultures. Openly gay critic Michael Musto opined "I am a harsh critic of the
gay community because I feel that when I first came out I thought I would be
entering a world of nonconformity and individuality and, "au contraire", it
turned out to be a world of clones in a certain way. I also hated the whole
body fascism thing that took over the gays for a long time."' Relationships.
Some U.S. studies have found that the majority of gay male couples are in
monogamous relationships. Research by Colleen Hoffon of 566 gay male couples
from the San Francisco Bay Area found that 75% were in monogamous
relationships. That study was funded by the National Institute of Mental Health
Openly gay actor Neil Patrick Harris has remarked, "I’m a big proponent of
monogamous relationships regardless of sexuality, and I’m proud of how the
nation is steering toward that." In the 1980s and 1990s, Sean Martin drew a
comic strip, Doc and Raider, which featured a gay couple living in or near
Toronto's Gay Village. The characters have recently been updated and moved to
the Web. The comic was humorous but sometimes addressed serious issues such as
gay-bashing, HIV, and spousal abuse. Online culture and communities. Recently,
a number of online social websites for gay men have been established.
Initially, these concentrated on sexual contact or titillation. Typically,
users were afforded a profile page as well as access to other members' pages,
member-to-member messaging and instant-message chat. Smaller, more densely
connected websites concentrating on social networking without a focus on sexual
contact have been established. Some forbid all explicit sexual content; others
do not. Lesbian culture. As with gay men, lesbian culture includes elements
both from the larger LGBT culture and elements that are specific to the lesbian
community. Often thought of in this regard are elements of counterculture that
have been primarily associated with lesbians in Europe, Australia/New Zealand
and North America and includes large, predominantly lesbian events such as
Michigan Womyn's Music Festival and the Club Skirts Dinah Shore Weekend.
Contemporary lesbian culture also has its own icons such as Melissa Etheridge.
Others include k.d. lang (butch), Ellen DeGeneres (androgynous), and Portia de
Rossi (femme). The history of lesbian culture over the last half-century has
also been tightly entwined with the evolution of feminism. Lesbian separatism
is an example of a lesbian theory and practice which identifies specifically
lesbian interests and ideas and promotes a specific sort of lesbian culture.
Older stereotypes of lesbian women stressed a dichotomy between women who
adhered to stereotypical male gender stereotypes ("butch") and stereotypical
female gender stereotypes ("femme"), and that typical lesbian couples consisted
of a butch/femme pairing. Today, some lesbian women adhere to being either
"butch" or "femme," but these categories are much less rigid and are now
uncommon as lesbianism becomes more mainstream. Also notable are diesel dykes,
extremely butch women who use male forms of dress and behavior. Lipstick
lesbian refers to feminine women who are attracted to other women. Bisexual
culture. Bisexual culture emphasizes opposition to, or disregard of, fixed
sexual and gender identity called monosexism (discrimination against bisexual,
fluid, pansexual and queer-identified people), bisexual erasure, and biphobia/
panphobia (hatred and/or distrust of people who do not adhere to monosexual
behavior). Biphobia is common (although lessening) in both the gay and lesbian
community and the straight community. Many bisexual, fluid, and pansexual
people consider themselves to be part of the LGBT or Queer community, despite
any discrimination they face. Contemporary western bisexual/pansexual and fluid
culture also has its own touchstones such as the books ', edited by Lani
Ka'ahumanu and Loraine Hutchins, and ' edited by Robyn Ochs, the British
science fiction television series "Torchwood", and icons including British
singer and activist Tom Robinson, The Black Eyed Peas member Fergie, Scottish
actor Alan Cumming, and American performance artist and activist Lady Gaga. The
bisexual pride flag flag was designed by Michael Page in 1998 in order to give
the community its own symbol comparable to the Gay pride flag of the mainstream
LGBT community. The deep pink or rose stripe at the top of the flag represents
the possibility of same gender attraction; the royal blue stripe at the bottom
of the flag represents the possibility of different gender attraction and the
stripes overlap in the central fifth of the flag to form a deep shade of
lavender or purple, which represents the possibility of attraction anywhere
along the entire gender spectrum. Additionally, Celebrate Bisexuality Day has
been observed on September 23 by members of the bisexual community and their
allies since 1999. Transgender culture. The study of transgender culture is
complicated by the many and various ways in which cultures deal with gender.
For example, in many cultures, people who are attracted to people of the same
sex — that is, those who in contemporary Western culture would identify as
gay, lesbian, or bisexual — are classed as a third gender, together with
people who would in the West be classified as transgender or transsexual. In
the contemporary West, there are usually several different groups of
transgender and transsexual people, some of which are extremely exclusive, like
groups only for transsexual women who explicitly want sex reassignment surgery,
or male, heterosexual-only cross-dressers. Transmen's groups are often, but not
always, more inclusive. Groups encompassing all transgender people, both
transmen and transwomen, have in most cases appeared only in the last few
years. Some transgender or transsexual women and men however do not classify as
being part of any specific "trans" culture, however there is a distinction
between transgender and transsexual people who make their past known to others
and those who wish to live according to their gender identity and not reveal
this past, stating that they should be able to live in their true gender role
in a normal way, and be in control of whom they choose to tell their past to.
Youth culture. Youth Pride, an extension of the Gay pride and LGBT social
movements, promotes equality amongst young members (usually above the age of
consent) of the Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, Intersex, and Questioning
(LGBTIQ) community. The movement exists in many countries and focuses mainly on
festivals and parades, enabling many LGBTIQ youth to network, communicate, and
celebrate their gender and sexual identities. Youth Pride organizers also point
to the value in building community and supporting young people as they are more
likely to get gay bashed and bullied. Schools that have a Gay-Straight Alliance
(GSA) handle issues of discrimination and violence against LGBTIQ youth better
than schools that do not because they help develop community and coping skills
and give students a safe-space to get health and safety information. Sometimes
the groups avoid labeling young people and instead let them identify themselves
on their own terms "when they feel safe". Gay and lesbian youth bear an
increased risk of suicide, substance abuse, school problems, and isolation
because of a "hostile and condemning environment, verbal and physical abuse,
rejection and isolation from family and peers" according to a U.S. Task Force
on Youth Suicide report. Further, LGBT youths are more likely to report
psychological and physical abuse by parents or caretakers, and more sexual
abuse. Suggested reasons for this disparity are that (1) LGBT youths may be
specifically targeted on the basis of their perceived sexual orientation or
gender non-conforming appearance, and (2) "risk factors associated with sexual
minority status, including discrimination, invisibility, and rejection by
family members...may lead to an increase in behaviors that are associated with
risk for victimization, such as substance abuse, sex with multiple partners, or
running away from home as a teenager." A 2008 study showed a correlation
between the degree of rejecting behavior by parents of LGB adolescents and
negative health problems in the teenagers studied. Crisis centers in larger
cities and information sites on the Internet have arisen to help youth and
adults. The Trevor Helpline, a suicide prevention helpline for LGBT youth, was
established by the filmmakers following the 1998 airing on HBO of the Academy
Award winning short film "Trevor"; Daniel Radcliffe donated a large sum to the
group and has appeared in service ads for them condemning homophobia. The
increasing mainstream acceptance of the greater LGBTIQ communities prompted the
Massachusetts Governors' Commission on Gay and Lesbian Youth to start an annual
Gay-Straight Youth Pride observance in 1995. In 1997 the Youth Pride Alliance
was founded as a non-profit to put on an annual youth pride event in
Washington, D.C. In 1998 Candace Gingrich was one of the speakers at Washington
D.C.'s Youth Pride Alliance, a coalition of 25 youth support and advocacy
groups. In 1999, the first annual Vermont Youth Pride Day was held. As of 2009,
it is the largest queer and allied youth event in Vermont and is organized by
Outright Vermont to "break the geographic and social barriers gay youngsters
living in rural communities face." In 2002, a college fair was added to the
event to connect students with colleges and discuss issues relating to how to
track students and ensure their safety. In April 2003 a Youth Pride Chorus
partly organized with New York's LGBT Community Center started rehearsals and
later performed at a June Pride concert at Carnegie Hall with the New York City
Gay Men's Chorus. in 2004 the San Diego chapter of Gay, Lesbian and Straight
Education Network (GLSEN) worked with the San Diego Youth Pride coordinators to
organize the Day of Silence throughout the county. In 2005, the Decatur Georgia
Youth Pride participated in a counter-protest against Westboro Baptist Church,
led by church head Fred Phelps' daughter, Shirley Phelps-Roper, who were
"greeting students and faculty as they arrived with words such as "God hates
fag enablers" and "Thank God for 9/11"" at ten locations. In 2008, Chicago's
Youth Pride Center, primarily serving "LGBT youth of color", opened a temporary
location and will move into their newly constructed building on Chicago's South
Side in 2010. In 2009, Utah Pride Center held an event to coincide with Youth
Pride Walk 2009, a "cross-country walk by two Utah women trying to draw
attention to the problems faced by homeless LGBT youth". In August 2010, the
first Hollywood Youth Pride was held with a focus on the "large number of
homeless LGBT youth living on Los Angeles streets." According to a 2007 report
"of the estimated 1.6 million homeless American youth, between 20 and 40
percent identify as lesbian, gay, bisexual or transgender. At larger pride
parades and festivals there are often LGBTIQ or queer youth contingents, and
some festivals designate safe-spaces for young people to provide safety and
security. Other groups within the LGBT community. Several other segments of the
LGBT community have their own significant communities and cultures. One is the
Deaf Queer community. Heterosexual idea of "roles". Society's attempt to make
homosexuals fit the heterosexual mold has resulted in ideas such as that all
gay men are either "tops" or "bottoms," and that one of the men in the
relationship must be "the woman" while the other is "the man," an idea that is
often met with irritation by gay men. Criticism and dissent. Criticism of LGBT
culture has come from a variety of sources. Some, like Michael Musto, view the
culture as being too conforming to certain caricatures or stereotypes that
alienate more 'fringe' members of the community. Others believe that the LGBT
community's emphasis on pursuits like Marxism, socialism, or any political
ideology is unworkable given the biological nature of being gay, lesbian,
bisexual, or transgender, and the diversity of backgrounds within the
community. Further, some believe a notion of 'separatism,' or falling into any
particular lifestyle as a group, is highly alienating to many people, as well
as alienating LGBT members within a broader society. Another problem is that
bisexual and transgender individuals often experience heavy social pressure to
identify as gay or lesbian and can face ostracism and discrimination from
mainstream LGBT culture. For bisexuals, this pressure is known as 'bisexual
erasure'. New York University School of Law professor Kenji Yoshino has
written, "gays de-legitimatize bisexuals... the lesbian and gay community
abounds with negative images of bisexuals as fence-sitters, traitors, cop-outs,
closet cases, people whose primary goal in life is to retain "heterosexual
privilege"". In response to these criticisms, some gay and lesbian commentators
retort that many or most of the people who call themselves 'bisexual' are
actually straight people co-opting a chic culture, and that this deception
hurts real gay people and lesbians. Finally, criticism has been leveled that
the LGBT community represents an artificial separation, rather than one based
on tangible customs or ethnic identification. In particular, the labels certain
LGBT members use to describe themselves vary widely and some simply prefer to
identify as loving a particular gender. Also, some people believe the LGBT
community idea is alienating as the abbreviation itself deliberately displays
difference with straight people and as a separate group (further, demarcating
three terms to do with sexuality with transgender identity, which is a
significantly broader phenomenon, is highly artificial), when equality
advocates would claim to represent integration. Some gay male commentators who
are in monogamous relationships argue that the mainstream gay culture's alleged
disdain of monogamy and its promotion of promiscuity has harmed efforts to
legalize same-sex marriage. Yuvraj Joshi argues that efforts to legalize same-
sex marriage have emphasized the sameness and respectability of gay people
while privatizing their queer differences. British journalist Mark Simpson
published a book titled "Anti-Gay" in 1996 that described various alleged forms
of intolerance by the mainstream gay community towards various subgroups. "The
Times" wrote that Simpson succeeded in "pointing out that oppression and
prejudice do not become legitimate just because they happen to be practiced by
the previously oppressed". Aiden Shaw of "Time Out New York" wrote that "Thank
fucking God someone did this, because... whatever happened to our
individuality, our differences?" Other commentators panned Simpson's argument,
with "Boyz" declaring "Simpson is a cunt."
