Zionist Freedom Alliance The Zionist Freedom Alliance (ZFA) is an activist
grassroots Zionist movement that advocates Israel's moral, legal and historic
rights for the Jewish people to the entire Land of Israel, which they consider
to include the territory captured during the 1967 Six-Day War. It was
established in 1999 by Magshimey Herut activists in response to what they
perceived to be growing anti-Israel sentiment among young people throughout the
world. ZFA claims that their narrative has not been presented since before the
start of the Oslo peace process and that this has resulted in the world’s
ignorance of Israel’s claim to all territory between the Mediterranean Sea
and Jordan River. ZFA views Zionism as a revolutionary struggle and itself as
the voice of Jewish national liberation. Its members are both religious and
non-religious Jews. Ideology. Revolutionary Zionism. Heavily influenced by the
philosophy of Israel Eldad, ZFA views Zionism as the national liberation
movement of the Jewish people and a revolution unparalleled by any other in
human history. The movement validates this claim by emphasizing that while
various revolutions have succeeded in leaving their mark on human development,
none have succeeded in reviving a dead language or relocating a scattered
nation from dispersion to a central location. ZFA defines the Zionist
Revolution as the liberation of Jewish land from foreign rule, the ingathering
of the Jewish people from the exile to their soil, the revival of Hebrew as a
spoken language for everyday use, and the creation of a utopian society that
will serve as a model of social justice to the world. The movement views itself
as the vanguard of this revolution and often calls itself the “voice of
Jewish liberation.” The above views are featured on the organization’s
website and have been expressed repeatedly by ZFA leader Yehuda HaKohen, who
hosts two internet based radio programs on Israel National Radio (channel
seven). Jewish National Rights. While mainstream Jewish leaders and pro-Israel
organizations on American campuses often try to present the State of Israel as
a democratic Western country with numerous security challenges, the Zionist
Freedom Alliance speaks of Israel as a Middle Eastern nation with a legitimate
moral and historic right to its entire country. In a July 2008 interview, ZFA
leader Yehuda HaKohen told Israel National News that:  In that same interview,
HaKohen angered American neo-conservative groups by stating that: "There is
nothing right-wing or conservative about wanting to keep our Jewish homeland
free from foreign rule. If we are truly the indigenous natives in the conflict,
then our cause should really be championed by liberal students everywhere.
Especially since the Bush administration that occupies Iraq and imposes a
Patriot Act on the American people is the very same administration pushing to
ethnically cleanse the Jewish people from portions of our homeland." ZFA views
the Jewish people as indigenous to the Middle East and the victims of Western
imperialism. Leading activists of the movement have often pointed out that
Great Britain, the United Nations and even the United States government did
everything in their power to prevent a Jewish state from coming into existence.
The Zionist struggle, according to ZFA, is therefore an anti-imperialist
struggle aimed at liberating the land of Israel from foreign rule and securing
the Jewish people’s right to self determination in their country. National
Liberation. As a national liberation movement, ZFA alleges to advocate freedom
for all nations from foreign rule (specifically the Chechens, Kurds, and Irish)
but denies that freedom to a Palestinian nation whom ZFA claims does not exist.
The movement officially argues in its "Covenant of Freedom" that while there
has yet to be a serious and objective historical analysis of the claims that
"Palestinian" Arabs constitute a distinct national group, there is overwhelming
evidence that the notion of such a people was invented as a propaganda weapon
to be used in the war against Zionism. ZFA activists have also been known to
more assertively argue that a Palestinian national identity was invented in the
1960s by the Arab League and Western powers for the purpose of robbing the
Jewish people of their homeland. ZFA claims that multi-national corporations
and Western governments seeking to promote globalization have been using the
Palestinian Arabs as a political tool against the State of Israel and that the
front line in the battle against globalization is actually the struggle to
retain Greater Israel. Unlike movements on Israel’s political right, ZFA
avoids anti-Arab rhetoric and actually advocates Israel becoming more Middle
Eastern in character. Many ZFA leaders, including Elie Yossef and Yehuda
HaKohen, have put forward the need for a genuine peace agreement between Israel
and the Arabs but have rejected the notion of territorial concessions as this
would be – in the view of ZFA – an historic injustice against the Jewish
people. Although opposed to many policies of recent Israeli governments, ZFA
views the State of Israel as being of great historic significance and deserving
of their loyalty. The movement places unity amongst Jews of all persuasions on
equal footing with the territorial integrity of the land of Israel and
therefore works to create dialogue and strengthen the bond between Jews with
opposing political and religious opinions. Views on Peace and the Middle East
Conflict. Although ZFA members are not known to have uniform views regarding
possible solutions to the Arab-Israeli conflict, the organization officially
opposes the notion of territorial concessions by Israel. At the same time,
Yehuda HaKohen has used his radio show on several occasions to speak out
against Islamophobia and has articulated a position that places blame for the
conflict not on Arab or Jewish shoulders but on third parties, particularly the
United States and Europe, who attempt to broker solutions between the sides. In
December 2008, HaKohen told Israel National News that:  Activities. ZFA differs
from other Zionist movements is that it fights for social causes often
associated with the left while maintaining a hard right position on Jewish
national identity and Israel’s borders. In November 2007, the Jewish
Telegraphic Agency reported the ZFA to be promoting Israeli nationalism on
twenty American college campuses and described the group as socially liberal
with a hard-right stance on Israeli border issues. On the organization’s
website, ZFA claims to take a revolutionary step in the Zionist world by
combining a faithful adherence to Jewish national aspirations with a steadfast
commitment to social justice within society. On American campuses. ZFA trains
activists on college campus to promote what the group terms "Jewish
liberation." In the field of pro-Israel advocacy, the movement is unique as it
speaks of Israel's moral right to the land rather than the country's security
needs. In February 2008 the ZFA created controversy at the University of
Pennsylvania by holding an aggressive demonstration against Breaking the
Silence, a group of ex-Israeli soldiers who came to the campus in order to
speak against the IDF's presence in territories captured by Israel in the 1967
Six-Day War. ZFA accused Breaking the Silence of being financed by Western
governments to smear the State of Israel, an accusation that was later
validated by The Jerusalem Post in July 2009. At the time of the demonstration,
a front page article and political cartoon in the Daily Pennsylvania portrayed
ZFA activists as unwilling to hear opinions contrary to their own. These
accusations were later refuted by local ZFA leader Brian Finkel in a letter to
the paper's editor which explained ZFA's perspective on what had taken place.
Israel Liberation Week. In April 2008, ZFA launched a week long program called
"Israel Liberation Week" at Hofstra University. During this week of events, ZFA
reached beyond the Jewish community and targeted a wider student public through
films, art exhibits and concerts that focused on Jewish rights to the land of
Israel, the Jewish revolt against British rule and the need for the State of
Israel to become an independent country. Reaching out to Muslim students.
During "Israel Liberation Week" at the University of Albany in November 2008,
ZFA activists made an effort to reach out to the Muslim Student Association in
order to find common ground on a host of issues. ZFA leaders claimed success in
reaching agreements with Muslim student leaders on several points and told
Israel National News that the MSA at Albany recognized the Jewish people’s
national rights, acknowledged that there really is no distinct Palestinian Arab
nation and that in order for Jews and Arabs to make peace Western interference
in the Middle East would have to end. ZFA and MSA agreed that both the Jewish
and Arab peoples are Middle Eastern peoples with a great deal in common and
that peace can only be achieved through grassroots dialogue. Violence at
Berkeley. On November 13, 2008, violence erupted between ZFA and the Students
for Justice in Palestine at an "Israel Liberation Week" event taking place at
UC Berkeley. The incident, which took place during a ZFA concert featuring
Black, Jewish and Mexican hip hop artists promoting freedom for Israel from
Western pressure and foreign influence, began when anti-Israel students
unfurled Palestinian flags from a balcony overlooking the concert stage. ZFA
activists attempted to remove the flags and a fight broke out between the two
organizations. While both groups accused the other of initiating the violence,
both agreed that ZFA prevailed in the actual fight. Following the incident, SJP
members told Berkeley police that pro-Israel students made racial slurs against
Arab students during the fight but the charge was denied by ZFA leaders, who
view both themselves and Arabs as belonging to the same Semitic race. ZFA
leader Yehuda HaKohen, who had delivered a speech from the stage during the
concert, told Israel National News that he opposed students attempting to
remove the flags but nevertheless saw value in the incident. "Even though I
wanted to avoid the altercation, I recognize the value in anti-Israel activists
getting put in their place by the very students they so often try to bully into
silence… ZFA might not have started the violence but we definitely finished
it. I hope Husam a member of Students for Justice in Palestine and his crew
think twice next time they want to get physical with any of our students."
Following the incident, one Jew and two Arabs were cited with charges of
battery by Berkeley police. Mainstream Jewish organizations refrained from
taking any sides in the conflict but distanced themselves from ZFA by
denouncing all acts of violence and violations of university policy. In Israel.
Following the trend of many ZFA student activists immigrating to the State of
Israel, the organization has created a chapter in the Jerusalem area. According
to the group's website the main focus of ZFA activities in Israel is to
increase the country's political independence through educating the public
against accepting foreign aid from the United States. ZFA has also participated
in the struggle against territorial withdrawals and the fight against
discrimination within Israeli society. L'Herut Tzion. Following the 2009
Israeli national elections, ZFA leaders teamed up with Kumah and other
nationalist organizations to establish the L'Herut Tzion (For the Freedom of
Zion) movement and champion the cause of Israeli independence. On the
anniversary of Jewish freedom fighter Avraham Stern's assassination, L'Herut
Tzion held a conference in Jerusalem that explained the root cause for most of
Israel's problems to be a lack of political independence. ZFA activists present
at the event told Israel National News that although most Israelis "oppose
territorial concessions", they also believe that Israel must obey the
directives of foreign governments, which often demand such concessions. While
addressing the conference Yehuda HaKohen declared:  Strengthening the Jewish
presence of Beit Hanina. In 2009 a number of ZFA members moved into the Beit
Shiva building in the northern Jerusalem neighborhood of Beit Hanina. The
building had been inhabited by veteran Lehi fighters following the 1967 Six-Day
War and had remained the sole Jewish building in an otherwise Arab
neighborhood. Concerned that as the elderly Lehi veterans die the Jewish hold
on the building would be weakened, ZFA activists began to move into apartments
left vacant by deceased tenants. One of the ZFA activists who moved into the
building told Israel National News that his move was in response to the
international community pressuring the Israeli government to halt Jewish
development in Jerusalem neighborhoods liberated in the Six-Day War.  Shomron
Volunteer Program. In August 2009 ZFA and the Shomron Liaisons Office
cooperated to create a volunteer program for American students in the hilltop
communities of the Samaria region. The controversial Jewish communities had
been the central focus of American pressure on Israel's government and students
looking to defy Washington and strengthen Israel's hold on the region spent a
week working, building and farming in Yitzhar, Shalhevet Yam, Har Brakha, Kfar
Tapuach, and Havat Gilad. The Jerusalem Post reported ZFA leader Yehuda HaKohen
working with a dozen program participants planting a vineyard on a hilltop near
the Har Brakha community, just outside Shechem and saying: "For us the main
issue is justice. When we come here to build and plant and support local
residents, we are not simply taking a political stance on Israeli policy. We
are resisting an historic crime from being perpetrated against our nation."
Binyamin Rubin, a ZFA leader from the University of Pennsylvania who had moved
to Israel a month prior to the program, told the Post that:  Rubin, who served
as the trip councilor for the program was quoted by Israel National News as
saying: “We are working to strengthen the Jewish people's hold on Samaria
which foreign powers are trying to take from us. For the students, the main
issue is not politics but justice. The Jewish people have every legal and
historic right to this land, and the program affords an outlet to express our
resistance.” David Ha'ivri, the executive director of the Shomron Liaisons
Office, emphasized to Israel National News that the program had been a pilot
run for what he hopes will become a mainstream experiential program for
Diaspora Jewish students.  In October 2009 the week long volunteer program was
repeated at the village of El Matan.
