Zombie walk A zombie walk is an organized public gathering of people who dress
up in zombie costumes. Usually taking place in an urban center, the
participants make their way around the city streets and through shopping malls
to a public space (or a series of taverns in the case of a zombie pub crawl) in
a somewhat orderly fashion. Customs. Zombie walks have become relatively common
in large cities, especially in North America, often becoming annual traditions,
though some are also spontaneous "flash mob" events or performance art; many
zombie walks in the United States have been "hunger marches", whereby the
intention is to raise awareness on the issue of world hunger. Promoted
primarily through word of mouth and online message boards, zombie walks are an
underground activity. During the event participants are encouraged to remain in
character as zombies and to communicate only in a manner consistent with zombie
behavior. This may include grunting, groaning and slurred, moaning calls for
'brains'. Zombie behavior is a hot topic of debate. Purists who draw their
definitions from the original Romero "Living Dead" films will claim that a
zombie would never have the ability to call for 'brains' and furthermore that a
zombie needs only living or freshly killed flesh for its sustenance, and not
the brain in particular. The complexity and purpose of some zombie walks have
grown and changed with their popularity. An advanced technique to heighten
interest and realism, some zombie mobs will "eat" victims to create new
zombies, in sight of onlookers. The better coordinated zombie mobs will
establish a route and an easily recognizable signal, so that other participants
can plant themselves, appearing as an otherwise ordinary human, along the route
in old, tearable clothes, and as the mob shambles along it can discover and
devour new victims. As the zombies surround the new victim to loudly feed,
concealing him or her from witnesses' view, they tear clothes and quickly apply
makeup and fake blood, to create a new zombie, who then shambles along with the
ever-expanding pack to find new victims. Some participants occasionally dress
up as soldiers who are called in to contain the outbreak, or survivors who are
trying to defend themselves from the onslaught of the zombie horde. Some events
are staged as spoof political rallies organized "to raise awareness of zombie
rights", with participants carrying placards. Many zombie walks have also been
staged as "hunger marches" with the intent of raising awareness of world hunger
and collecting items for food banks. History. The earliest zombie walk on
record was held on 19 August 2001 in Sacramento, California. The event, billed
as "The Zombie Parade," was the brain-child of Bryna Lovig, who suggested it to
the organizers of The Trash Film Orgy as a way to promote their annual midnight
film festival. It was held again on 27 July 2002, and has since become an
annual event, drawing over 1000 participants in 2012. The idea spread to other
cities and in October 2003 the second zombie gathering on record, billed as a
"Zombie Walk" was held in Toronto, Ontario. It was organized by local horror
movie fan, Thea Munster, and had only six participants. In subsequent years the
Zombie Walk grew tremendously in size. The Zombie Walk then moved to Vancouver,
B.C. and spread the zombie walk tradition to that city. On 27 August 2005, over
400 participants proceeded through Vancouver's Pacific Centre Mall, travelled
on the SkyTrain (referred to for the event as the "SkyBrain" or the
"BrainTrain") and continued 35 blocks to Mountain View Cemetery. The mid to
late 2000s saw an exponential gain in popularity for zombie walks due largely
to the increase of successful zombie films at the time, the "Resident Evil"
movies, "28 Days Later", Zack Snyder's "Dawn of the Dead", "Shaun of the Dead",
George A. Romero's "Land of the Dead", and "Zombieland" being a few examples.
Documentation of the phenomenon appeared in mainstream news media and blogs,
such as Boingboing and the Blog of the Living Dead. Zombie walks soon spread
across North America and to cities around the globe, such as Mar del Plata,
Argentina. On 27 October 2012, Singapore's first large-scale zombie walk -
Singapore Zombie Walk - will be held in Clarke Quay at 829pm. . Rio de Janeiro
had its first Zombie Walk on November the 2nd 2007 (Day of the Dead holliday)
and the event has become annual since then. On 29 October 2006, nearly 900
"zombie walkers" gathered at the Monroeville Mall outside of Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania, which served as the set of George A. Romero's classic zombie film
"Dawn of the Dead", to participate in Pittsburgh's first annual Walk of the
Dead. In addition to setting a Guinness World Record, the event was a benefit
for the Greater Pittsburgh Community Food Bank. Pittsburgh's zombie walk has
since grown into an annual horror festival called Zombie Fest. Zombie Fest is
organized by "The It's Alive Show", a local Pittsburgh late night horror and
science fiction television program. The Pittsburgh festival plays host to the
annual Walk of the Dead as well as a zombie ball, costume contest, concerts,
and celebrity guest appearances. Zombie Fest also serves as the headquarters of
"The It's Alive Show"'s World Zombie Day, a world hunger charity event. Zombie
walks are also a regular occurrence at ZomBcon, "the world's first zombie
convention." ZomBcon takes place every October in Seattle, Washington. Apart
from zombie walks, ZomBcon also features panel discussions with zombie authors,
actors and artists, workshops, film screenings, and other activities for zombie
fans. ZomBcon also organizes Seattle's annual Red, White and Dead zombie walk
every July. World records. The first zombie walk world record was set on 29
October 2006 at Monroeville Mall outside of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, during
Pittsburgh's first annual Walk of the Dead. Guinness World Records certified
that 894 people participated in the walk. The second zombie walk at Monroeville
Mall during the 2007 Zombie Fest was also verified by Guinness World Records as
the largest gathering of zombies to date (28 October 2007), with 1,028
participants. The 2007 Toronto Zombie Walk drew a crowd of over 1,100 zombies,
a number confirmed by Toronto Police Services. At the time, this was the
largest zombie walk on record. A zombie march in Brisbane on 25 May 2008 set an
unofficial record of over 1,500 participants according to media reports. On 21
June 2008, a zombie march took place in Chicago with over 1,550 zombies
estimated, setting a new unofficial record. On 31 October 2008, a zombie walk
took place in the Old Market Square of Nottingham, England, with 1,227
attendees. The event was organized by GameCity, and the zombies did dances to
zombie-related songs such as "Thriller", "Disturbia" and "Ghostbusters". There
was also a performance from American singer Jonathan Coulton. The event
achieved a new official Guinness World Record for largest zombie walk. In June
2009, Pittsburgh zombie fans won back the Guinness World Record after Guinness
verified that the Zombie Fest 'Walk of the Dead' at Monroeville Mall on 26
October 2008, had 1,341 participating walkers. On 3 July 2009, a zombie walk
organized by "Fremont Outdoor Movies" in Seattle, Washington beat all previous
zombie walk records. Guinness World Records officially recorded 3,894 zombies
at the 'Red, White and Dead' zombie event, though local news claimed 4,277
participants. In October 2009, Guinness World Records officially recorded and
approved a new record for the largest gathering of zombies. The record was set
at ‘The Big Chill Festival’ in Ledbury, England, on 6 August 2009. There
were 4,026 zombie mob participants. On 25 October 2009, the biggest recorded
gathering of zombies in the Southern Hemisphere occurred in Brisbane with over
5,000 participants reportedly in attendance as reported by the Queeensland
Police. The walk was also a charity event helping to raise awareness and money
for the aptly chosen organization, The Brain Foundation of Australia. On 30
October 2009, zombie walkers in Grand Rapids, Michigan attempted a second run
at the zombie mob world record. An estimated 8,000 participants braved rainy
weather to gather in Calder Plaza outside of Grand Rapids's City and County
buildings. The event was coordinated by Rob Bliss, organizer of Grand Rapids'
first zombie walk. Approximately forty to 50 volunteers collected signatures
from the crowd. The record is currently unverified by Guinness World Records.
Organizers of the fifth annual Denver Zombie Crawl in Denver, Colorado counted
more than 7,300 zombie walkers in the event. This is considered to be a low
figure as up to 1/3 of the total participants did not walk through the counter.
The crawl took place on 23 October 2010, in downtown Denver at the 16th Street
Mall. On 24 October 2010, a reported 10,000 strong zombie walk took place in
Brisbane. As with previous years, the event raised money for the Brain
Foundation of Australia. Guinness has yet to officially recognize either event
as the new world record. Guinness officially recognized a new record for the
world's largest gathering of zombies on 30 October 2010, at the 3rd annual New
Jersey Zombie Walk on the Asbury Park Boardwalk in Asbury Park, New Jersey.
Guinness recorded 4,093 zombies at the event, though organizers along with
police and fire officials estimate more than 5,000 zombies were in attendance.
In July 2011, more cities would attempt to break the zombie gathering Guinness
world record held by Asbury Park, New Jersey. On 2 July 2011, Seattle attempted
to take back the record at the 3rd annual Fremont "Red, White and Dead" Zombie
Walk hosted by Fremont Outdoor Movies. The zombie count according to Fremont
organizers was 4,522 in attendance with estimations of over 4,800–5,000 after
the official stop point for counting zombies. Representatives from Guinness did
not attend the event. On 23 July 2011, The Dublin Zombie Walk in Dublin,
Ireland had an estimated 8,000 zombies in attendance, but confirmation is still
pending from Guinness World Records. October 2011 also saw multiple attempts to
break The New Jersey Zombie Walk's Guinness world record for largest zombie
gathering. On 8 October, the unofficial count for the Pittsburgh World Zombie
Day Zombie Walk was 4,900 zombies. Over 7,000 zombies are believed to have
attended the 9th Annual Toronto Zombie Walk on 22 October. Both the annual
Denver Zombie Crawl on 22 October and the annual Brisbane Zombie Walk on 23
October claim to have had over 12,000 zombie participants. Guinness has yet to
officially recognize a new world record for largest gathering of zombies. On 29
October, the city of Long Beach, California, set out to break a World Record as
part of its fourth annual Zombie Walk event, produced by community
organizations Long Beach Cinematheque and Mondo Celluloid, and partnered with
Michael Jackson-inspired flash hmob "Thrill the World", who set out to break a
world record of their own with the "World's Biggest Thriller Flash Mob." The
endeavor gained world-wide press, with media covering the event from as far as
the United Kingdom ("Telegraph" UK). By night's end an estimated 14,000
participants had taken over the entirety of the downtown area, breaking local
business sales records and all but shutting down traffic for hours. Guinness
has yet to officially recognize that a new world record had been set. In
November 2011, Mexico broke a new world record for largest zombie gathering.
Guinness officially counted 9,806 participants, surpassing the previous record
established by Asbury Park, New Jersey. On 20 October 2012, Brighton, United
Kingdom broke the current world record of 4,093 held by New Jersey. The
Brighton Zombie Parade, known to residents as Beach of the Dead had 6,000
participants.). Also on 20 October 2012 in Santiago, Chile a new world record
was set with more than 12,000 zombies walking in the chilean city. on 28
October 2012, in Buenos Aires Argentina, reached the 25,000 zombies dethroning
the zombie walk of Chile. Charity. Charity work continues to be a common
component at zombie walks across the planet. Community service organizations
such as Zombie Squad have used zombie walks as demonstrations to raise funds
and awareness for local and global issues, such as world hunger. Both world
record walks at Pittsburgh's Zombie Fest have included food drives. In 2008,
"The It's Alive Show" (the organizers of Zombie Fest), initiated World Zombie
Day. "The It's Alive Show" encouraged cities all over the globe to celebrate
World Zombie Day by holding zombie walks to raise awareness of global hunger.
The first World Zombie Day took place 26 October 2008; the same day as
Pittsburgh's Zombie Fest. More than 30 cities worldwide took part in this day
of global zombie walking. Food drives for local hunger-related charities took
place at each participating city's zombie walk. Pittsburgh's walk alone brought
in more than one ton of food to benefit the Greater Pittsburgh Community Food
Bank. The second World Zombie Day took place 11 October 2009 with even more
participation from cities all over the world. Pub crawl variant. Some zombie
walks incorporate pub crawling, during which participants visit multiple bars
over the course of the walk. On 15 October 2005, the first large-scale zombie
pub crawl was held in Minneapolis, Minnesota. The crawl consisted of roughly
150 participants in zombie costumes moving from bar to bar in the city's
Northeast district. The Minneapolis "Zombie Pub Crawl" has since become an
annual event and attendance has grown exponentially; each year it takes place
in a different area of the city. Similar large-scale, zombie-themed pub crawls
have developed in New Orleans, Providence, Reno, Nevada, Houston, Eau Claire,
Chicago, and Philadelphia. Philadelphia's zombie pub crawl is held on Easter
Sunday in celebration of Jesus, "the world's most famous zombie". Zombie pub
crawls are now a regular occurrence in cities all over the world. In 2007, the
Viking Hats group organized a Halloween zombie walk in London that ended at the
Tate London. London's Zombie Pub Crawl is now an annual Halloween weekend
event. Reactions. Due to the spontaneous and naturally chaotic nature of a
zombie apocalypse, some zombie walks have been host to criticism. On 31 October
2006, a young woman in Bloomington, Indiana reported to police that a group of
"zombies" attacked her in her Land Rover and covered the vehicle in "purple
goo". The zombies in question turned out to be participants in a small, local
zombie walk, and no arrests were made. At the 2006 Vancouver Zombie Walk, an
incident occurred in which an impatient driver attempted to drive his car
through a crowd of zombies headed down Robson St. This resulted in some minor
injuries among the zombies, severe damage to the car, a number of insurance
claims, and coverage on CBC Television. On 1 May 2010, the annual Zombie
Shuffle in Melbourne saw the largest attendance in its five year history, but
some locals complained of the mess that the zombie "gore" left behind as well
as the walk's disruption of a play for preschoolers. On 19 August 2012, a
Russian zombie walk in support of Pussy Riot in Omsk, Siberia was banned by the
local government.
