Moon landing conspiracy theories The Moon landing conspiracy theories claim
that some or all elements of the Apollo program and the associated Moon
landings were hoaxes staged by NASA and members of other organizations. Various
groups and individuals have made such conspiracy claims since the mid-1970s.
The most notable claim is that the six manned landings (1969‚Äì1972) were faked
and that the twelve Apollo astronauts did not walk on the Moon. Conspiracy
theorists (henceforth "") base their claims on the notion NASA and others
knowingly misled the public into believing the landings happened by
manufacturing, destroying, or tampering with evidence; including photos,
telemetry tapes, transmissions, rock samples, and even some key witnesses.
Conspiracists have managed to sustain public interest in their theories for
more than 40 years despite there being much third-party evidence for the
landings and detailed rebuttals to the hoax claims. Polls taken in various
locations have shown that between 6% and 20% of Americans surveyed believe that
the manned landings were faked, rising to 28% in Russia. Even as late as 2001,
the major television network Fox broadcast a documentary named "Conspiracy
Theory: Did We Land on the Moon?" claiming NASA faked the first landing in 1969
to win the Space Race. Since the late 2000s, high-definition photos taken by
the LROC spacecraft of the Apollo landing sites have captured the lander
modules and the tracks left by the astronauts. In 2012, images were released
showing the Apollo flags still standing on the Moon. Origins. The first book
about the subject, Bill Kaysing's self-published "We Never Went to the Moon:
America's Thirty Billion Dollar Swindle", was released in 1974, two years after
the Apollo Moon flights had ended. The Flat Earth Society was one of the first
organizations to accuse NASA of faking the landings, arguing that they were
staged by Hollywood with Walt Disney sponsorship, based on a script by Arthur
C. Clarke and directed by Stanley Kubrick. Folklorist Linda Degh suggests that
writer-director Peter Hyams's 1978 film "Capricorn One", which shows a hoaxed
journey to Mars in a spacecraft that looks identical to the Apollo craft, may
have given a boost to the hoax theory's popularity in the post-Vietnam War era.
She notes that this happened during the post-Watergate era, when American
citizens were inclined to distrust official accounts. Degh writes: "The mass
media catapult these half-truths into a kind of twilight zone where people can
make their guesses sound as truths. Mass media have a terrible impact on people
who lack guidance". In "A Man on the Moon", published in 1994, Andrew Chaikin
mentions that at the time of Apollo 8's lunar-orbit mission in December 1968,
similar conspiracy ideas were already in circulation. Public opinion. There are
subcultures worldwide which advocate the belief that the Moon landings were
faked. By 1977 the Hare Krishna magazine "Back to Godhead" called the landings
a hoax. The reason they gave is that the Sun is 93,000,000 miles away and
according to Vedas the Moon is 800,000 miles farther away than that, making the
Moon nearly 94,000,000 miles away. To travel that span in 91 hours would
require a speed of more than a million miles per hour, "a patently impossible
feat even by the scientists' calculations." James Oberg of "ABC News" said that
the conspiracy theory is taught in Cuban schools and wherever Cuban teachers
are sent. A poll conducted in the 1970s by the United States Information Agency
in several countries in Latin America, Asia, and Africa found that most
respondents were unaware of the Moon landings, many of the others dismissed
them as propaganda or science fiction, and many thought that it had been the
Russians that landed on the Moon. A 1999 Gallup poll found that 6% of the
Americans surveyed doubted that the Moon landings happened and that 5% of those
surveyed had no opinion, which roughly matches the findings of a similar 1995
"Time/CNN" poll. Officials of Fox television said that such skepticism rose to
about 20% after the February 2001 airing of Fox network's TV show "Conspiracy
Theory: Did We Land on the Moon?" seen by about 15 million viewers. This 2001
Fox special is seen as having promoted the hoax claims. A 2000 poll held by the
Russian "Public Opinion Fund" found that 28% of those surveyed did not believe
that American astronauts landed on the Moon, and this percentage is roughly
equal in all social-demographic groups. In 2009, a poll held by the United
Kingdom's "Engineering & Technology" magazine found that 25% of those surveyed
did not believe that men landed on the Moon. Another poll gives that 25% of
18‚Äì25-year-olds surveyed were unsure that the landings happened. Motives.
Claimed motives of the United States and NASA. Those who believe the landings
were faked give several theories about the motives of NASA and the United
States government. The three main theories are below. The US government deemed
it vital that it win the Space Race against the Soviet Union. Going to the Moon
would be risky and expensive, as exemplified by John F. Kennedy famously
stating that the United States chose to go "because" it was hard. A main reason
for the race to the Moon was the Cold War. Philip Plait says in "Bad Astronomy"
that the Soviets‚Äîwith their own competing Moon program and a formidable
scientific community able to analyze NASA data‚Äîwould have cried foul if the
United States tried to fake a Moon landing, especially since their own program
had failed. Proving a hoax would have been a huge propaganda win for the
Soviets. Bart Sibrel responded, "the Soviets did not have the capability to
track deep spacecraft until late in 1972, immediately after which, the last
three Apollo missions were suddenly canceled." However, the Soviets had been
sending unmanned spacecraft to the Moon since 1959, and "during 1962, deep
space tracking facilities were introduced at IP-15 in Ussuriisk and IP-16 in
Evpatoria, while Saturn communication stations were added to IP-3, 4 and 14",
the latter having a 100 million km range. The Soviet Union tracked the Apollo
missions at the Space Transmissions Corps, which was "fully equipped with the
latest intelligence-gathering and surveillance equipment". Vasily Mishin, in an
interview for the article "The Moon Programme That Faltered" ("Spaceflight",
March 1991, vol. 33, 2‚Äì3), describes how the Soviet Moon program dwindled
after the Apollo landings. It is claimed that NASA faked the landings to forgo
humiliation and to ensure that it continued to get funding. NASA raised about
US$30 billion to go to the Moon, and Bill Kaysing claims that this could have
been used to "pay off" many people. Since most conspiracists believe that
sending men to the Moon was impossible at the time, they argue that landings
had to be faked to fulfill President Kennedy's 1961 promise: "achieving the
goal, "before this decade is out," of landing a man on the Moon and returning
him safely to the Earth". Others have claimed that, with all the known and
unknown hazards, NASA would not have risked the public humiliation of
astronauts crashing to their deaths on the Moon, broadcast on live TV. It is
claimed that the landings helped the US government because they were a popular
distraction from the Vietnam War; and so manned landings suddenly ended about
the same time that the US ended its role in the Vietnam War. Claimed motives of
the conspiracists. Some have argued that one of the main motives of the
conspiracists is to make money from pseudoscience. In November 2002, actor Tom
Hanks, who starred in the movie "Apollo 13" and produced the documentary "From
the Earth to the Moon", was asked what he thought of the conspiracy theories.
He replied: "We live in a society where there is no law making money in the
promulgation of ignorance or, in some cases, stupidity". An unsuccessful
attempt was made to sue astronaut Jim Lovell (Apollo 8 and Apollo 13) because
he said that he went to the Moon. The hoax claims. Many conspiracy theories
have been put forward. They either claim that the landings did not happen and
that NASA employees (and sometimes others) have lied; or that the landings did
happen but not in the way that has been told. Conspiracists have focused on
perceived gaps or inconsistencies in the historical record of the missions. The
foremost idea is that the whole manned landing program was a hoax from start to
end. Some claim that the technology to send men to the Moon was lacking or that
the Van Allen radiation belts, solar flares, solar wind, coronal mass ejections
and cosmic rays made such a trip impossible. Vince Calder and Andrew Johnson,
scientists from Argonne National Laboratory, gave detailed answers to the
conspiracists' claims on the laboratory's website. They show that NASA's
portrayal of the Moon landing is fundamentally accurate, allowing for such
common mistakes as mislabeled photos and imperfect personal recollections.
Using the scientific process, any hypothesis that is contradicted by the
observable facts may be rejected. The 'real landing' hypothesis is a single
story since it comes from a single source, but there is no unity in the hoax
hypothesis because hoax accounts vary between conspiracists. Number of
conspirators involved. According to James Longuski (Professor of Aeronautics
and Astronautics Engineering at Purdue University), the conspiracy theories are
impossible because of their size and complexity. The conspiracy would have to
involve the more than 400,000 people who worked on the Apollo project for
nearly ten years, the 12 men who walked on the Moon, the six others who flew
with them as Command Module Pilots, and another six astronauts who orbited the
Moon. Hundreds of thousands of people‚Äîincluding astronauts, scientists,
engineers, technicians, and skilled laborers‚Äîwould have had to keep the
secret. Longuski argues that it would have been much easier to really land on
the Moon than to generate such a huge conspiracy to fake the landings. To date,
nobody from the US government or NASA who would have had a link to the Apollo
program has said the Moon landings were hoaxes. Penn Jillette made note of this
in the "Conspiracy Theories" episode of his contrarian television show "" in
2005. He said that, with the number of people that would have had to be
involved, "someone" would have outed the hoax by now. With the government's
track record of keeping secrets (noting Watergate), Jillette said the
government could not have silenced everyone if the landings were faked.
Photograph and film oddities. Conspiracists focus heavily on NASA photos. They
point to oddities in photos and films taken on the Moon. Photography experts
(even those unrelated to NASA) answer that the oddities are what one would
expect from a real Moon landing, and not what would happen with tweaked or
studio imagery. Some of the main arguments and counter-arguments are listed
below. 1. In some photos, crosshairs seem to be behind objects. The cameras
were fitted with a reseau plate (a clear glass plate with crosshairs etched
on), making it impossible for any photographed object to appear "in front" of
the grid. This suggests that objects have been "pasted" over them. 2.
Crosshairs are sometimes rotated or in the wrong place. 3. The quality of the
photographs is implausibly high. 4. There are no stars in any of the photos;
the Apollo 11 astronauts also claimed in a post-mission press conference to not
remember seeing any stars. 5. The angle and color of shadows are inconsistent.
This suggests that artificial lights were used. 6. There are identical
backgrounds in photos which, according to their captions, were taken miles
apart. This suggests that a painted background was used. 7. The number of
photos taken is implausibly high. Up to one photo per 50 seconds. 8. The photos
contain artifacts like the two seemingly matching 'C's on a rock and on the
ground. These may be labeled studio props. 9. A resident of Perth, Australia,
with the pseudonym "Una Ronald", said she saw a soft drink bottle in the frame
while watching one of the manned landings as it happened. 10. The book "Moon
Shot" contains an obvious composite photo of Alan Shepard hitting a golf ball
on the Moon with another astronaut. 11. There appear to be "hot spots" in some
photos that look like a huge spotlight was used. 12. Who filmed Neil Armstrong
stepping onto the Moon? Environment. 1. The astronauts could not have survived
the trip because of exposure to radiation from the Van Allen radiation belt and
galactic ambient radiation (see radiation poisoning and health threat from
cosmic rays). Some conspiracists have suggested that Starfish Prime (high
altitude nuclear testing in 1962) was a failed attempt to disrupt the Van Allen
belts. 2. Film in the cameras would have been fogged by this radiation. 3. The
Moon's surface during the daytime is so hot that camera film would have melted.
4. The Apollo 16 crew could not have survived a big solar flare firing out when
they were on their way to the Moon. They would have been fried. 5. The flag
placed on the surface by the astronauts fluttered despite there being no wind
on the Moon. This suggests that it was filmed on Earth and a breeze caused the
flag to flutter. Sibrel said that it may have been caused by indoor fans used
to cool the astronauts, since their spacesuit cooling systems would have been
too heavy on Earth. 6. Footprints in the Moon dust are unexpectedly well
preserved, despite the lack of moisture. 7. The alleged Moon landings used
either a sound stage, or were filmed outside in a remote desert with the
astronauts either using harnesses or slow-motion photography to make it look
like they were on the Moon. Mechanical issues. 1. The Moon landers made no
blast craters or any sign of dust scatter. 2. The second stage of the launch
rocket and/or the Moon lander ascent stage made no visible flame. Image:Ap17-
ascent.ogg|Apollo 17 LM leaving the Moon; rocket exhaust visible only briefly.
File:Apollo8Launch.ogg|Apollo 8 launch through the first stage separation
Image:Apollo6Interstage.jpg|Exhaust flame may not be visible outside the
atmosphere, as in this photo. Rocket engines are the dark structures at the
bottom center.  3. There should not have been deep dust around the Moon
landers, given the blast from the landing engines. 4. The Moon landers weighed
17 tons and made no mark on the Moondust, yet footprints can be seen beside
them. 5. The air conditioning units that were part of the astronauts'
spacesuits could not have worked in an environment of no atmosphere. 6.
Although Apollo 11 had made a landing well outside its target area, Apollo 12
made a pin-point landing, within walking distance (less than 200 meters) of the
"Surveyor 3" probe, which had landed on the Moon in April 1967. 7. All six
lunar landings happened during the first Presidential administration of Richard
Nixon and no leader of any other state has claimed to have landed astronauts on
the Moon, even though the mechanical means of doing so should have become
progressively much easier after almost 40 years of steady or even swift
technological development. Transmissions. 1. There should have been more than a
two-second delay in communications between Earth and the Moon, at a distance of
. 2. Typical delays in communication were about 0.5 seconds. 3. The Parkes
Observatory in Australia was billed to the world for weeks as the site that
would be relaying communications from the first Moonwalk. However, five hours
before transmission they were told to stand down. 4. Parkes supposedly had the
clearest video feed from the Moon, but Australian media and all other known
sources ran a live feed from the United States. 5. Better signal was supposedly
received at Parkes Observatory when the Moon was on the opposite side of the
planet. Missing data. Blueprints and design and development drawings of the
machines involved are missing. Apollo 11 data tapes containing telemetry and
the high quality video (before scan conversion from slow-scan TV to standard
TV) of the first Moonwalk are also missing. See the documentary film "Did We
Go?" (2005). Tapes. Dr. David Williams (NASA archivist at Goddard Space Flight
Center) and Apollo 11 flight director Eugene F. Kranz both acknowledged that
the Apollo 11 telemetry data tapes are missing. Conspiracists see this as
evidence that they never existed. The Apollo 11 telemetry tapes were different
from the telemetry tapes of the other Moon landings because they contained the
raw television broadcast. For technical reasons, the Apollo 11 lander carried a
slow-scan television (SSTV) camera (see Apollo TV camera). To broadcast the
pictures to regular television, a scan conversion had to be done. The radio
telescope at Parkes Observatory in Australia was able to receive the telemetry
from the Moon at the time of the Apollo 11 Moonwalk. Parkes had a bigger
antenna than NASA's antenna in Australia at the Honeysuckle Creek Tracking
Station, so it received a better picture. It also received a better picture
than NASA's antenna at Goldstone Deep Space Communications Complex. This direct
TV signal, along with telemetry data, was recorded onto one-inch fourteen-track
analog tape at Parkes. The original SSTV transmission had better detail and
contrast than the scan-converted pictures, and it is this tape that is missing.
A crude, real-time scan conversion of the SSTV signal was done in Australia
before it was broadcast worldwide. However, still photos of the original SSTV
image are available (see photos). About fifteen minutes of it were filmed by an
amateur 8 mm film camera and these are also available. Later Apollo missions
did not use SSTV. At least some of the telemetry tapes from the ALSEP
scientific experiments left on the Moon (which ran until 1977) still exist,
according to Dr Williams. Copies of those tapes have been found. Others are
looking for the missing telemetry tapes for different reasons. The tapes
contain the original and highest quality video feed from the Apollo 11 landing.
Some former Apollo personnel want to find the tapes for posterity, while NASA
engineers looking towards future Moon missions believe the tapes may be useful
for their design studies. They have found that the Apollo 11 tapes were sent
for storage at the US National Archives in 1970, but by 1984 all the Apollo 11
tapes had been returned to the Goddard Space Flight Center at their request.
The tapes are believed to have been stored rather than re-used. Goddard was
storing 35,000 new tapes per year in 1967, even before the Moon landings. In
November 2006 Cosmos Magazine reported that about 100 data tapes recorded in
Australia during the Apollo 11 mission had been found in a small marine science
laboratory in the main physics building at the Curtin University of Technology
in Perth, Australia. One of the old tapes has been sent to NASA for analysis.
The slow-scan television images were not on the tape. In July 2009, NASA
indicated that it must have erased the original Apollo 11 Moon footage years
ago so that it could re-use the tape. In December 2009 NASA issued a final
report on the Apollo 11 telemetry tapes. Senior engineer Dick Nafzger, who was
in charge of the live TV recordings during the Apollo missions, is now in
charge of the restoration project. After a three-year search, the "inescapable
conclusion" was that about 45 tapes (estimated 15 tapes recorded at each of the
three tracking stations) of Apollo 11 video were erased and re-used, said
Nafzger. In time for the 40th anniversary of the Apollo 11 landing, Lowry
Digital has been tasked with restoring the surviving footage. President of
Lowry Digital Mike Inchalik said that, "this is by far and away the lowest
quality" video the company has dealt with. Nafzger praised Lowry for restoring
"crispness" to the Apollo video, which will remain in black and white and
contain conservative digital enhancements. The $230,000 restoration project
that will take months to complete will not include sound quality improvements.
Some selections of restored footage in high definition have been made available
on the NASA website. Blueprints. The website Xenophilia.com documents a hoax
claim that blueprints for the Apollo Lunar Module, Lunar rover, and associated
equipment are missing. There are some diagrams of the Lunar Module and Lunar
Rover on the NASA website and on Xenophilia.com. Grumman appears to have
destroyed most of their documentation, but copies of the blueprints for the
Saturn V exist on microfilm. An unused Lunar Module is on show at the Cradle of
Aviation Museum. The Lunar Module designated LM-13 would have landed on the
Moon during the Apollo 18 mission, but was instead put into storage when the
mission was cancelled. Other unused Lunar Modules are on show: LM-2 at the
National Air and Space Museum and LM-9 at Kennedy Space Center. Four mission-
worthy Lunar Rovers were built. Three of them were carried to the Moon on
Apollo 15, 16, and 17, and left there. After Apollo 18 was canceled, the other
Rover was used for spare parts for the Apollo 15 to 17 missions. The only
rovers on display are test vehicles, trainers, and models. The "Moon buggies"
were built by Boeing. The 221-page operation manual for the Lunar Rover
contains some detailed drawings, although not the blueprints. An original
Saturn V rocket is on display at the US Space and Rocket Center in Huntsville,
Alabama. The rocket components are also on public display, as is much of the
original equipment used on the Apollo missions. Technology. Bart Sibrel cites
the relative level of US and USSR space technology as evidence that the Moon
landings could not have happened. For much of the early stages of the "space
race", the USSR was ahead of the US, yet in the end, the USSR was never able to
fly a manned craft to the Moon, let alone land one on the surface. It is argued
that, because the USSR was unable to do this, the US should have also been
unable to develop the technology to do so. For example, he claims that, during
the Apollo Program, the USSR had five times more manned hours in space than the
US, and notes that the USSR was the first to achieve many of the early
milestones in space: the first man-made satellite in orbit (October 1957,
Sputnik 1); the first living creature in orbit (a dog named Laika, November
1957, Sputnik 2); the first man in space and in orbit (Yuri Gagarin, April
1961, Vostok 1); the first woman in space (Valentina Tereshkova, June 1963,
Vostok 6); and the first spacewalk (EVA) (Alexei Leonov in March 1965, Voskhod
2). However, most of the Soviet gains listed above were matched by the USA
within a year, and sometimes within weeks. In 1965, the US started to achieve
many firsts (such as the first successful space rendezvous), which were
important steps in a mission to the Moon. Furthermore, NASA and others say that
these gains by the Soviets are not as impressive as they seem; that a number of
these firsts were mere stunts that did not advance the technology greatly, or
at all (e.g., the first woman in space). In fact, by the time of the launch of
the first manned Earth-orbiting Apollo flight (Apollo 7), the USSR had made
only nine spaceflights (seven with one cosmonaut, one with two, one with three)
compared to 16 by the US. In terms of spacecraft hours, the USSR had 460 hours
of spaceflight; the US had 1,024 hours. In terms of astronaut/cosmonaut time,
the USSR had 534 hours of manned spaceflight whereas the US had 1,992 hours. By
the time of Apollo 11, the US‚Äôs lead was much wider than that. (See List of
human spaceflights, 1960s and refer to individual flights for the length of
time.) Moreover, the USSR did not develop a successful rocket capable of a
manned lunar mission until the 1980s ‚Äì their N1 rocket failed on all four
launch attempts between 1969 and 1972. The Soviet LK Lander Moon lander was
tested in unmanned low-Earth-orbit flights three times in 1970 and 1971. Deaths
of NASA personnel. In a television program about the hoax allegations, Fox
Entertainment Group listed the deaths of ten astronauts and of two civilians
related to the manned spaceflight program as having possibly been killed as
part of a cover-up. Two of them, X-15 pilot Mike Adams and MOL pilot Robert
Lawrence, had no connection with the civilian manned space program of which
Apollo was a part. All of the deaths listed occurred at least 20 months
"before" Apollo 11 and the subsequent flights. As of August 2012, eight of the
twelve Apollo astronauts who landed on the Moon between 1969 and 1972 still
survive, including Buzz Aldrin. Also, nine of the twelve Apollo astronauts who
flew to the Moon without landing between 1968 and 1972 still survive, including
Michael Collins. There is no evidence to support Gelvani's claim that Apollo 15
astronaut James Irwin was about to come forward before his death, by a heart
attack, in 1989. Irwin had suffered several heart attacks in the years before
his death. Also, the overall chief of their manned-spaceflight program, Sergei
Korolev, died while undergoing surgery in January 1966. Stanley Kubrick
involvement. Stanley Kubrick is accused of having produced much of the footage
for Apollo 11 and 12, presumably because he had just directed "", which is
partly set on the Moon and featured advanced special effects. It has been
claimed that when "2001" was in post-production in early 1968, NASA secretly
approached Kubrick to direct the first three Moon landings. The launch and
splashdown would be real but the spacecraft would stay in Earth orbit and fake
footage broadcast as "live from the Moon‚Äù. No evidence was offered for this
theory, which overlooks many facts. For example, "2001" was released before the
first Apollo landing and Kubrick's depiction of the Moon's surface is much
different from its appearance in Apollo video, film and photography. Kubrick
did hire Frederick Ordway and Harry Lange, both of whom had worked for NASA and
major aerospace contractors, to work with him on "2001". Kubrick also used some
50¬ mm f/0.7 lenses that were left over from a batch made by Zeiss for NASA.
However, Kubrick only got this lens for "Barry Lyndon" (1975). The lens was
originally a still-photo lens and needed changes to be used for motion filming.
The mockumentary based on this idea, "Dark Side of the Moon", could have fueled
the conspiracy theory. There was a similar hoax article, originally posted as a
joke, but which has been quoted as in earnest by conspiracy theorist Clyde
Lewis. Academic work. In 2002, NASA granted US$15,000 to James Oberg for a
commission to write a point-by-point rebuttal of the hoax claims. However, NASA
cancelled the commission later that year, after complaints that the book would
dignify the accusations. Oberg said that he meant to finish the book. In
November 2002 Peter Jennings said "NASA is going to spend a few thousand
dollars trying to prove to some people that the United States did indeed land
men on the Moon," and "NASA had been so rattled, hired [somebody to write a
book refuting the conspiracy theorists". Oberg says that belief in the hoax
theories is not the fault of the conspiracists, but rather that of teachers and
people (including NASA) who should provide information to the public. In 2004,
Martin Hendry and Ken Skeldon of the University of Glasgow were awarded a grant
by the UK based Particle Physics and Astronomy Research Council to investigate
Moon landing conspiracy theories. In November 2004, they gave a lecture at the
Glasgow Science Centre where the top ten claims by conspiracists were
individually addressed and refuted. "MythBusters" special. An episode of
"MythBusters" in August 2008 was dedicated to the Moon landings. The
‚Äò‚ÄôMythBusters‚Äô‚Äô crew scientifically tested many of the conspiracists‚Äô
claims. Some of the testing was done in a NASA training facility. All of the
claims examined on the show were labeled as having been "Busted", meaning that
the myths were not true. Third-party evidence of Moon landings. Imaging the
landing sites. Conspiracists claim that observatories and the Hubble Space
Telescope should be able to photograph the landing sites. This implies that the
world's major observatories (as well as the Hubble Program) are complicit in
the hoax by refusing to take photos of the landing sites. Photos of the Moon
have been taken by Hubble, including at least two Apollo landing sites, but the
Hubble resolution limits viewing of lunar objects to sizes no smaller than
60‚Äì75 yards (55‚Äì69 meters), which is insufficient resolution to see any
landing site features. Leonard David published an article on space.com, on
April 27, 2001 which showed a photo taken by the Clementine mission showing a
diffuse dark spot at the site NASA says is the Apollo 15 lander. The evidence
was noticed by Misha Kreslavsky, of the Department of Geological Sciences at
Brown University, and Yuri Shkuratov of the Kharkiv Astronomical Observatory in
Ukraine. The European Space Agency's SMART-1 unmanned probe sent back photos of
the landing sites, according to Bernard Foing, Chief Scientist of the ESA
Science Program. "Given SMART-1‚Äôs initial high orbit, however, it may prove
difficult to see artifacts", said Foing in an interview on space.com. In 2002,
Alex R. Blackwell of the University of Hawaii pointed out that some photos
taken by Apollo astronauts while in orbit around the Moon show the landing
sites. "The Daily Telegraph" (London) published a story in 2002 saying that
European astronomers at the Very Large Telescope (VLT) would use it to view the
landing sites. According to the article, Dr Richard West said that his team
would take "a high-resolution image of one of the Apollo landing sites". Marcus
Allen, a conspiracist, answered that no photos of hardware on the Moon would
convince him that manned landings had happened. As the VLT is capable of
resolving equivalent to the distance between the headlights of a car as seen
from the Moon, it may be able to photograph some features of the landing sites.
Such photos, if and when they become available, would be the first non-NASA-
produced photos of the sites at that definition. The Japan Aerospace
Exploration Agency (JAXA) launched their SELENE Moon orbiter on September 14,
2007 (JST) from Tanegashima Space Center. SELENE orbited the Moon at about
altitude. In May 2008 JAXA reported detecting the "halo" generated by the
Apollo 15 lunar module engine exhaust from a Terrain Camera image. A 3D
reconstructed photo also matched the terrain of an Apollo 15 photo taken from
the surface. On July 17, 2009, NASA released low-resolution engineering test
photos of the Apollo 11, Apollo 14, Apollo 15, Apollo 16 and Apollo 17 landing
sites that have been photographed by the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter as part
of the process of starting its primary mission. The photos show the descent
stage of the landers from each mission on the Moon‚Äôs surface. The photo of
the Apollo 14 landing site also shows tracks made by an astronaut between a
science experiment (ALSEP) and the lander. Photos of the Apollo 12 landing site
were released by NASA on September 3, 2009. The "Intrepid" lander descent
stage, experiment package (ALSEP), Surveyor 3 spacecraft, and astronaut
footpaths are all visible. While the LRO images have been enjoyed by the
scientific community as a whole, they have not done anything to convince
conspiracists that the landings happened. On September 1, 2009, India's lunar
mission Chandrayaan-1 took photos of the Apollo 15 landing site and tracks of
the lunar rovers. The Indian Space Research Organisation launched their
unmanned lunar probe on September 8, 2008 (IST) from Satish Dhawan Space
Centre. The photos were taken by a hyper spectral camera fitted as part of the
mission's image payload. China's second lunar probe, Chang'e 2, which was
launched in 2010, can photograph the lunar surface with a resolution of up to
1.3 meters (4.3¬ ft). It spotted traces of the Apollo landings. Moon rocks. The
Apollo Program collected of Moon rocks during the six manned missions. Analyses
by scientists worldwide all agree that these rocks came from the Moon ‚Äì no
published accounts in peer-reviewed scientific journals exist that dispute this
claim. The Apollo samples are easily distinguishable from both meteorites and
Earth rocks in that they show a lack of hydrous alteration products, they show
evidence of having undergone impact events on an airless body, and they have
unique geochemical traits. Furthermore, most are more than 200 million years
older than the oldest Earth rocks. The Moon rocks also share the same traits as
Soviet samples. Conspiracists argue that Marshall Space Flight Center Director
Wernher von Braun's trip to Antarctica in 1967 (about two years before the
Apollo 11 launch) was to gather lunar meteorites to be used as fake Moon rocks.
Because von Braun was a former SS officer (though one who had been detained by
the Gestapo), the documentary film "Did We Go?" suggests that he could have
been pressured to agree to the conspiracy to protect himself from
recriminations over his past. NASA said that von Braun‚Äôs mission was "to look
into environmental and logistic factors that might relate to the planning of
future space missions, and hardware". NASA continues to send teams to work in
Antarctica to mimic the conditions on other planets. It is now accepted by the
scientific community that rocks have been blasted from both the Martian and
Lunar surface during impact events, and that some of these have landed on the
Earth as meteorites. However, the first Antarctic lunar meteorite was found in
1979, and its lunar origin was not recognized until 1982. Furthermore, lunar
meteorites are so rare that it is unlikely that they could account for the 382
kilograms of Moon rocks that NASA gathered between 1969 and 1972. Only about 30
kilograms of lunar meteorites have been found on Earth thus far, despite
private collectors and governmental agencies worldwide searching for more than
20 years. While the Apollo missions gathered 382 kilograms of Moon rocks, the
Soviet Luna 16, Luna 20 and Luna 24 robots gathered only 326¬ grams combined
(that is, less than one-thousandth as much). Indeed, current plans for a
Martian sample return would only gather about 500¬ grams of soil, and a
recently proposed South Pole-Aitken basin robot mission would only gather about
1 kilogram of Moon rock. If NASA had used similar robot technology, then
between 300 and 2000 robot missions would have been needed to collect the
current amount of Moon rocks that is held by NASA. On the makeup of the Moon
rocks, Kaysing asked: ""Why was there no mention of gold, silver, diamonds, or
other precious metals on the Moon? It was never discussed by the press or
astronauts."" Geologists realize that gold and silver deposits on Earth are the
result of the action of hydrothermal fluids concentrating the precious metals
into veins of ore. Since in 1969 water was believed to be absent on the Moon,
no geologist would bother discussing the possibility of finding these on the
Moon in any great amount. President Nixon gave 135 sovereign states, all 50 US
states and the US territories each an Apollo 11 Moon rock and Apollo 17
Goodwill Moon Rock. Many of these Moon rocks have been stolen, destroyed, or
are missing. The loss of so many Moon rocks has been used by conspiracists to
bolster their claim that man never went to the Moon. NASA counters that
accusation by stating that the vast majority of Moon rocks and soil gathered on
the Moon are securely held at Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas and Brooks
Air Force Base in San Antonio, Texas. NASA also points out that independent
scientists have studied the Moon rocks since they were brought to Earth.
Missions tracked by independent parties. Aside from NASA, a number of groups
and individuals tracked the Apollo missions as they happened. On later
missions, NASA released information to the public explaining where and when the
spacecraft could be sighted. Their flightpaths were tracked using radar and
they were sighted and photographed using telescopes. Also, radio transmissions
between the astronauts on the surface and in orbit were independently recorded.
Retroreflectors. The presence of retroreflectors (mirrors used as targets for
Earth-based tracking lasers) from the Lunar laser ranging experiment is
evidence that there were landings. Lick Observatory attempted to detect from
Apollo 11's retroreflector while Armstrong and Aldrin were still on the Moon
but did not succeed until August 1, 1969. The Apollo 14 astronauts deployed a
retroreflector on February 5, 1971 and McDonald Observatory detected it the
same day. The Apollo 15 retroreflector was deployed on July 31, 1971 and was
detected by McDonald Observatory within a few days. Smaller retroreflectors
were also put on the Moon by the Russians, they were attached to the unmanned
lunar rovers Lunokhod 1 and Lunokhod 2.
