Black Power Black Power is a political slogan and a name for various associated
ideologies aimed at promoting the Black racial group. It is used in the
movement among people of Black African descent throughout the world, though
primarily by African Americans in the United States. The movement was prominent
in the late 1960s and early 1970s, emphasizing racial pride and the creation of
black political and cultural institutions to nurture and promote black
collective interests and advance black values. "Black Power" expresses a range
of political goals, from defense against racial oppression, to the
establishment of social institutions and a self-sufficient economy. The
earliest known usage of the term is found in a 1954 book by Richard Wright
entitled "Black Power". Although he did not "coin" the phrase, New York
politician Adam Clayton Powell Jr. used the term on May 29, 1966, during a
baccalaureate address at Howard University: "To demand these God-given rights
is to seek black power." Origin as a political slogan. "This is the twenty-
seventh time I have been arrested and I ain't going to jail no more! The only
way we gonna stop them white men from whuppin' us is to take over. What we
gonna start sayin' now is Black Power!" Stokely Carmichael saw the concept of
"Black Power" as a means of solidarity between individuals within the movement.
With his conception and articulation of the word, he felt this movement was not
just a movement for racial desegregation, but rather a movement to help combat
America's crippling racism. He was quoted in saying: "For the last time, 'Black
Power' means black people coming together to form a political force and either
electing representatives or forcing their representatives to speak their
needs." A range of ideology. Some Black Power adherents believed in Black
autonomy, with a variety of tendencies such as black nationalism, and black
separatism. Such positions were for the most part in direct conflict with those
of leaders of the mainstream Civil Rights Movement, and thus the two movements
have often been viewed as inherently antagonistic. However, certain groups and
individuals participated in both civil rights and black power activism. Not all
Black Power advocates were in favor of black nationalism and black separatism.
While Stokely Carmichael and SNCC were in favor of black nationalism,
organizations such as the Black Panther Party for Self-Defense were not. Though
they considered themselves to be at war with a power structure that was indeed
all white, they were not at war with all Whites, merely the individuals in the
existing power structure, who happened to be all white. Bobby Seale, Chairman
and Co-Founder of the Black Panther Party for Self-Defense, was outspoken about
this. His stand was that the oppression of black people was more of a result of
economic exploitation than anything innately racist. In his book "Seize the
Time", he states that "In our view it is a class struggle between the massive
proletarian working class and the small, minority ruling class. Working-class
people of all colors must unite against the exploitative, oppressive ruling
class. So let me emphasize again -- we believe our fight is a class struggle
and not a race struggle." Bayard Rustin, an elder statesman of the Civil Rights
Movement, was a harsh critic of Black Power in its earliest days. Writing in
1966, shortly after the March Against Fear, Rustin said that Black Power “not
only lacks any real value for the civil rights movement, but [...] its
propagation is positively harmful. It diverts the movement from a meaningful
debate over strategy and tactics, it isolates the Negro community, and it
encourages the growth of anti-Negro forces.” He particularly criticized the
Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) and SNCC for their turn toward Black Power,
arguing that these two organizations once “awakened the country, but now they
emerge isolated and demoralized, shouting a slogan that may afford a momentary
satisfaction but that is calculated to destroy them and their movement.”
Internationalist offshoots of black power include African Internationalism,
pan-Africanism, black nationalism, and black supremacy. Background. The
movement for Black Power in the U.S. came during the Civil Rights Movement in
the 1960s. Many members of SNCC, among them Stokely Carmichael (later Kwame
Ture), were becoming critical of the nonviolent approach to confronting racism
and inequality—articulated and practiced by Martin Luther King, Jr., the
NAACP and other moderates—and rejected desegregation as a primary objective.
Douglass, Frederick. Letter to an abolitionist associate (1857). In "Organizing
for Social Change: A Mandate For Activity In The 1990s". Bobo, K.; Randall, J.;
and Max, S. (eds). Cabin John, Maryland: Seven Locks Press (1991). Civil Rights
leaders also believed in agitation, but most did not believe in physically
violent retaliation. During the March Against Fear, there was a division
between those aligned with Martin Luther King, Jr. and those aligned with
Carmichael, marked by their respective slogans, "Freedom Now" and "Black
Power." While King never endorsed the slogan, his rhetoric sometimes came close
to it. In his 1967 book "Where Do We Go From Here?", King wrote that "power is
not the white man's birthright; it will not be legislated for us and delivered
in neat government packages." Impact. Although the concept remained imprecise
and contested and the people, who used the slogan ranged from businesspeople
who used it to push black capitalism to revolutionaries who sought an end to
capitalism, the idea of Black Power exerted a significant influence. It helped
organize scores of community self-help groups and institutions that did not
depend on Whites. It was used to force black studies programs at colleges, to
mobilize black voters to elect black candidates, and to encourage greater
racial pride and self-esteem. Impact on Black Politics. Though the Black Power
movement did not immediately remedy the political problems faced by African
Americans in the 1960s and 1970s, the movement did contribute to the
development of black politics both directly and indirectly. As a contemporary
of and successor to the Civil Rights Movement, the Black Power movement
created, what sociologist Herbert H. Haines refers to as a “positive radical
flank effect” on political affairs of the 1960s. Though the nature of the
relationship between the Civil Rights Movement and the Black Power movement is
contested, Haines’ study of the relationship between black radicals and the
mainstream civil rights movement indicates that Black Power generated a
“crisis in American institutions which made the legislative agenda of
‘polite, realistic, and businesslike’ mainstream organizations” more
appealing to politicians. In this way, it can be argued that the more strident
and oppositional messages of the Black Power movement indirectly enhanced the
bargaining position of more moderate activists. Black Power activists
approached politics with vitality, variety, wit, and creativity that shaped the
way future generations approached dealing with America’s societal problems
(McCartney 188). These activists capitalized on the nation’s recent awareness
of the political nature of oppression, a primary focus of the Civil Rights
Movement, developing numerous political action caucuses and grass roots
community associations to remedy the situation The National Black Political
Convention, held March 10–12, 1972, was a significant milestone in black
politics of the Black Power era. Held in Gary, Indiana, a majority black city,
the convention included a diverse group of black activists, although it
completely excluded whites. The convention was criticized for its racial
exclusivity by Roy Wilkins of the NAACP, a group that supported integration.
The delegates created a National Black Political Agenda with stated goals
including the election of a proportionate number of black representatives to
Congress, community control of schools, national health insurance, etc. Though
the convention did not result in any direct policy, the convention advanced
goals of the Black Power movement and left participants buoyed by a spirit of
possibility and themes of unity and self-determination. A concluding note to
the convention, addressing its supposed idealism, read: “At every critical
moment of our struggle in America we have had to press relentlessly against the
limits of the ‘realistic’ to create new realities for the life of our
people. This is our challenge at Gary and beyond, for a new Black politics
demands new vision, new hope and new definitions of the possible. Our time has
come. These things are necessary. All things are possible.” Though such
political activism may not have resulted in direct policy, they provided
political models for later movements, advanced a pro-black political agenda,
and brought sensitive issues to the forefront of American politics. In its
confrontational and often oppositional nature, the Black Power movement,
started a debate within the black community and America as a nation over issues
of racial progress, citizenship, and democracy, namely “the nature of
American society and the place of the African American in it.”. The continued
intensity of debate over these same social and political issues is a tribute to
the impact of the Black Power movement in arousing the political awareness and
passions of citizens. Impact on other movements. Though the aims of the Black
Power movement were racially specific, much of the movement’s impact has been
its influence on the development and strategies of later political and social
movements. By igniting and sustaining debate on the nature of American society,
the Black Power movement created what other multiracial and minority groups
interpreted to be a viable template for the overall restructuring of society.
By opening up discussion on issues of democracy and equality, the Black Power
movement paved the way for a diverse plurality of social justice movements,
including black feminism, environmental movements, affirmative action, and gay
and lesbian rights. Central to these movements were the issues of identity
politics and structural inequality, features emerging from the Black Power
movement Because the Black Power movement emphasized and explored a black
identity, movement activists were forced to confront issues of gender, class
and as well. Many activists in the Black Power movement became active in
related movements. This is seen in the case of the “second wave” of
women’s right activism, a movement supported and orchestrated to a certain
degree by women working from within the coalition ranks of the Black Power
movement. The boundaries between social movements became increasingly unclear
at the end of the 1960s and into the 1970s; where the Black Power movement ends
and where these other social movements begin is often unclear. “It is
pertinent to note that as the movement expanded the variables of gender, class,
and only compounded issues of strategy and methodology in black protest
thought.” Impact on African-American identity. Due to the negative and
militant reputation of such auxiliaries as that of the Black Panther Party,
many people felt that this movement of "insurrection" would soon serve to cause
discord, and disharmony through the entire U.S. Even Stokely Carmichael stated,
"When you talk of Black Power, you talk of building a movement that will smash
everything Western civilization has created." Though Black Power at the most
basic level refers to a political movement, the psychological and cultural
messages of the Black Power movement, though less tangible, have had perhaps a
longer lasting impact on American society than concrete political changes.
Indeed, “fixation on the ‘political’ hinders appreciation of the
movement’s cultural manifestations and unnecessarily obscures black
culture’s role in promoting the psychological well being of the Afro-American
people.”. States William L. Van Deburg, author of A New Day in Babylon,
“movement leaders never were as successful in winning power for the people as
they were in convincing people that they had sufficient power within themselves
to escape ‘the prison of self-deprecation’” Primarily, the liberation and
empowerment experienced by African Americans occurred in the psychological
realm. The movement uplifted the black community as a whole by cultivating
feelings of racial solidarity, often in opposition to the world of white
Americans, a world that had physically and psychologically oppressed Blacks for
generations. Through the movement, Blacks came to understand themselves and
their culture by exploring and debating the question, “who are we?” in
order to establish a unified and viable identity. Throughout the Civil Rights
Movement and black history a tension has existing between those wishing to
minimize and maximize racial difference. W.E.B. Du Bois and Martin Luther King
Jr. often attempted to deemphasize race in their quest for equality, while
those advocating for separatism and colonization emphasized an extreme and
irreconcilable difference between races. The Black Power movement largely
achieved an equilibrium of “balanced and humane ethnocentrism.” The impact
of the Black Power movement in generating valuable discussion about ethnic
identity and black consciousness manifests itself in the relatively recent
proliferation of academic fields such as American studies, Black Studies, and
Africana studies in both national and international institutions. The respect
and attention accorded to African Americans’ history and culture in both
formal and informal settings today is largely a product of the movement for
Black Power in the 1960s and 1970s. Impact in Britain. Black Power got a
foothold in Britain when Carmichael came to London in July 1967 to attend the
Dialectics of Liberation Congress. As well as his address at the Congress, he
also made a speech at Speakers' Corner. At that time there was no Black Power
organization in Britain although there was Michael X's Racial Adjustment Action
Society. However this was more influenced by the visit of Malcolm X in that
year. Michael X also adopted Islam at this stage, whereas Black Power was not
organised around any religious confession. Black is beautiful. The cultivation
of pride in the African-American race was often summarized in the phrase "Black
is Beautiful". The phrase is rooted in its historical context, yet the
relationship to it has changed in contemporary times. “I don’t think it’s
‘Black is beautiful’ anymore. It’s ‘I am beautiful and I’m black.’
It’s not the symbolic thing, the afro, power sign… That phase is over and
it succeeded. My children feel better about themselves and they know that
they’re black,” stated a respondent in Bob Blauner’s longitudinal oral
history of U.S. race relations in 1986. The outward manifestations of an
appreciation and celebration of blackness abound: black dolls, natural hair,
black Santas, models and celebrities that were once rare and symbolic have
become commonplace. The "Black is beautiful" cultural movement aimed to dispel
the notion that black people's natural features such as skin color, facial
features and hair are inherently ugly. John Sweat Rock was the first to coin
the phrase "Black is Beautiful", in the slavery era. The movement asked that
men and women stop straightening their hair and attempting to lighten or bleach
their skin. The prevailing idea in American culture was that black features are
less attractive or desirable than white features. The movement is largely
responsible for the popularity of the Afro. Most importantly, it gave a
generation of African Americans the courage to feel good about who they are and
how they look. Impact on arts and culture. The Black Power movement produced
artistic and cultural products that both embodied and generated pride in
“blackness” and further defined an African-American identity that remains
contemporary. Black Power is often seen as a cultural revolution as much as a
political revolution, with the goal of celebrating and emphasizing the
distinctive group culture of African Americans to an American society that had
previously been dominated by white artistic and cultural expressions. Black
power utilized all available forms of folk, literary, and dramatic expression
based in a common ancestral past to promote a message of self-actualization and
cultural self-definition. The emphasis on a distinctive black culture during
the Black Power movement publicized and legitimized a culture gap between
Blacks and Whites that had previously been ignored and denigrated. More
generally, in recognizing the legitimacy of another culture and challenging the
idea of white cultural superiority, the Black Power movement paved the way for
the celebration of multiculturalism in America today. The cultural concept of
“soul” was fundamental to the image of African-American culture embodied by
the Black Power movement. Soul, a type of “in-group cultural cachet,” was
closely tied to black America’s need for individual and group self-
identification. A central expression of the “soulfulness” of the Black
Power generation was a cultivation of aloofness and detachment, the creation of
an “aura or emotional invulnerability,” a persona that challenged their
position of relative powerlessness in greater society. The nonverbal
expressions of this attitude, including everything from posture to handshakes,
were developed as a counterpoint to the rigid, “up-tight” mannerisms of
white people. Though the iconic symbol of black power, the arms raised with
biceps flexed and clenched fists, is temporally specific, variants of the
multitude of handshakes, or “giving and getting skin,” in the 1960s and
1970s as a mark of communal solidarity continue to exist as a part of black
culture. Clothing style also became an expression of Black Power in the 1960s
and 1970s. Though many of the popular trends of the movement remained confined
to the decade, the movement redefined standards of beauty that were
historically influenced by Whites and instead celebrated a natural
“blackness.” As Stokely Carmichael said in 1966, “We have to stop being
ashamed of being black. A broad nose, thick lip and nappy hair is us and we are
going to call that beautiful whether they like it or not.” “Natural” hair
styles, such as the Afro, became a socially acceptable tribute to group unity
and a highly visible celebration of black heritage. Though the same social
messages may no longer consciously influence individual hair or clothing styles
in today’s society, the Black Power movement was influential in diversifying
standards of beauty and aesthetic choices. The Black Power movement raised the
idea of a black aesthetic that revealed the worth and beauty of all black
people. In developing a powerful identity from the most elemental aspects of
African-American folk life, the Black Power movement generated attention to the
concept of “soul food,” a fresh, authentic, and natural style of cooking
that originated in Africa. The flavor and solid nourishment of the food was
credited with sustaining African Americans through centuries of oppression in
America and became an important aid in nurturing contemporary racial pride.
Black Power advocates used the concept of “soul food” to further
distinguish between white and black culture; though the basic elements of soul
food were not specific to African-American food, Blacks believed in the
distinctive quality, if not superiority, of foods prepared by Blacks. No longer
racially specific, traditional “soul foods” such as yams, collard greens,
and deep-fried chicken continue to hold a place in contemporary culinary life.
Black Arts Movement. The Black Arts Movement or BAM, founded in Harlem by
writer and activist Amiri Baraka (born Everett LeRoy Jones), can be seen as the
artistic branch of the Black Power movement. This movement inspired black
people to establish ownership of publishing houses, magazines, journals and art
institutions. Other well-known writers who were involved with this movement
included Nikki Giovanni; Don L. Lee, later known as Haki Madhubuti; Sonia
Sanchez; Maya Angelou; Dudley Randall; Sterling Plumpp; Larry Neal; Ted Joans;
Ahmos Zu-Bolton; and Etheridge Knight. Several black-owned publishing houses
and publications sprang from the BAM, including Madhubuti's Third World Press,
Broadside Press, Zu-Bolton's Energy Black South Press, and the periodicals
"Callaloo" and "Yardbird Reader". Although not strictly involved with the
Movement, other notable African-American writers such as novelists Ishmael Reed
and Toni Morrison and poet Gwendolyn Brooks can be considered to share some of
its artistic and thematic concerns. BAM sought “to link, in a highly
conscious manner, art and politics in order to assist in the liberation of
black people”, and produced an increase in the quantity and visibility of
African-American artistic production. Though many elements of the Black Arts
movement are separate from the Black Power movement, many goals, themes, and
activists overlapped. Literature, drama, and music of Blacks “served as an
oppositional and defensive mechanism through which creative artists could
confirm their identity while articulating their own unique impressions of
social reality.” In addition to acting as highly visible and unifying
representations of “blackness,” the artistic products of the Black Power
movement also utilized themes of black empowerment and liberation. For
instance, black recording artists not only transmitted messages of racial unity
through their music, they also became significant role models for a younger
generation of African Americans. Updated protest songs not only bemoaned
oppression and societal wrongs, but utilized adversity as a reference point and
tool to lead others to activism. Some Black Power era artists conducted brief
mini-courses in the techniques of empowerment. In the tradition of cultural
nationalists, these artists taught that in order to alter social conditions,
Blacks first had to change the way they viewed themselves; they had to break
free of white norms and strive to be more natural, a common theme of African-
American art and music. Musicians such as the Temptations sang lyrics such as
“I have one single desire, just like you / So move over, son, ‘cause I’m
comin’ through” in their song “Message From a Black Man,” they
expressed the revolutionary sentiments of the Black Power movement. Black Arts
Movement By breaking into a field typically reserved for white Americans,
artists of the Black Power era expanded opportunities for current African
Americans. “Today’s writers and performers,” writes William L. Van
Deburg, “recognize that they owe a great deal to Black Power’s explosion of
cultural orthodoxy”.
