Chicano nationalism Chicano nationalism is the ethnic nationalist ideology of
Chicanos. While there were nationalistic aspects of the Chicano Movement of the
1960s and 1970s, the Movement tended to emphasize civil rights and political
and social inclusion rather than nationalism. For this reason, Chicano
nationalism is better described as an ideology than as a political movement.
Background. Violence and discrimination against Mexican Americans continued
into the 1950s and 1960s. Many organizations, businesses, and homeowners
associations had official policies to exclude Mexican Americans. In many areas
across the Southwest, Mexican Americans lived in separate residential areas,
due to laws and real estate company policies. This group of laws and policies,
known as redlining, lasted until the 1950s, and fall under the concept of
official segregation. In many other instances, it was more of a general social
understanding that Mexicans should be excluded from White society. For
instance, signs with the phrase "No Dogs or Mexicans" were posted in small
businesses and public pools throughout the Southwest well into the 60's. Some
members of the Mexican American community began to question whether
assimilation was possible or even desirable. At the same time, a sense of
ethnic consciousness and unity was forming, especially among the youth, around
the plight of the farmworkers. Mexican Americans, some of whom began calling
themselves "Chicanos" as a symbol of ethnic pride, also began to uncover their
history and critically analyze what they learned in public schools. With this
new sense of identity and history, the early proponents of the Chicano movement
began viewing themselves as a colonized people entitled to self-determination
of their own. Some of them also embraced a form of nationalism that was based
on their perception of the failure of the United States government to live up
to the promises that it had made in the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo. Quote. The
concept of Chicano nationalism is perhaps best articulated in the 1968 Plan
Espiritual de Aztlán, generally considered the manifesto of the Chicano
Movement. It states, "El Plan Espiritual de Aztlán sets the theme that the
Chicanos ("La Raza de Bronze") must use their nationalism as the key or common
denominator for mass mobilization and organization. Once we are committed to
the idea and philosophy of El Plan de Aztlán, we can only conclude that
social, economic, cultural, and political independence is the only road to
total liberation from oppression, exploitation, and racism. Our struggle then
must be for the control of our barrios, campos, pueblos, lands, our economy,
our culture, and our political life. El Plan commits all levels of Chicano
society - the barrio, the campo, the ranchero, the writer, the teacher, the
worker, the professional - to "La Causa"." Functions and basis. Chicano
nationalism allowed Chicanos to define themselves as a group on their own
terms, and was a determination on their part to mold their own destiny. It is
rooted in the Aztec creation myth of Aztlán, a "northerly place". As the
Aztecs are central to the conquest and history of Mexico, the use of the word
took on the added dimension of the reclamation of an indigenous heritage as
part of the decolonization process. The sense of Chicano nationalism was
enhanced by a geographical proximity of the United States and Mexico. Chicanos
use the name Aztlán in reference to territories within the boundaries of the
Mexican Cession, the land that was "granted" to Spain in 1493 by Pope Alexander
VI in Bull Inter caetera, then claimed by the Mexican Empire in 1821 when Spain
signed the Treaty of Córdoba at the conclusion of the Mexican War of
Independence, then claimed as "territories" (as opposed to "states", often
referred to as "provinces") by 1824 Constitution, and finally ceded to the
United States in 1848 as an outcome of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo
(although it also included Texas, which had earlier proclaimed its independence
from the government in Mexico City and was independent territory.) The
commitment to a nationalist ideology allowed Chicano activists to supersede
differences that threatened their unity. Mexican Americans had regional,
linguistic, age, cultural, racial, and gender differences, all of which were
all subsumed to a mutual dedication to the Chicano Movement. This emphasis on
cultural nationalism would persist well into the late seventies before the
concept of activism ‘sin fronteras’ (without borders) and Marxist critiques
of empire transformed the Chicano Left, causing them to turn their attention
towards conflicts such as the Zapatista National Liberation Army’s (EZLN)
revolution against neo-liberal economic doctrine in Chiapas, Mexico.
