Constitutional law Constitutional law is the body of law which defines the
relationship of different entities within a state, namely, the executive, the
legislature, and the judiciary. Not all nation states have codified
constitutions, though all such states have a "jus commune", or law of the land,
that may consist of a variety of imperative and consensual rules. These may
include customary law, conventions, statutory law, judge-made law or
international rules and norms. Functions of constitutions. State and legal
structure. Constitutional laws may often be considered second order rulemaking
or rules about making rules to exercise power. It governs the relationships
between the judiciary, the legislature and the executive with the bodies under
its authority. One of the key tasks of constitutions within this context is to
indicate hierarchies and relationships of power. For example, in a unitary
state, the constitution will vest ultimate authority in one central
administration and legislature, and judiciary, though there is often a
delegation of power or authority to local or municipal authorities. When a
constitution establishes a federal state, it will identify the several levels
of government coexisting with exclusive or shared areas of jurisdiction over
lawmaking, application and enforcement. Human rights. Human rights or civil
liberties form a crucial part of a country's constitution and govern the rights
of the individual against the state. Most jurisdictions, like the United States
and France, have a codified constitution, with a bill of rights. A recent
example is the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union which was
intended to be included in the Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe,
that failed to be ratified. Perhaps the most important example is the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights under the UN Charter. These are intended to ensure
basic political, social and economic standards that a nation state, or
intergovernmental body is obliged to provide to its citizens but many do
include its governments. Some countries like the United Kingdom have no
entrenched document setting out fundamental rights; in those jurisdictions the
constitution is composed of statute, case law and convention. A case named
"Entick v. Carrington" is a constitutional principle deriving from the common
law. John Entick's house was searched and ransacked by Sherriff Carrington.
Carrington argued that a warrant from a Government minister, the Earl of
Halifax was valid authority, even though there was no statutory provision or
court order for it. The court, led by Lord Camden stated that,  Inspired by
John Locke, the fundamental constitutional principle is that the individual can
do anything but that which is forbidden by law, while the state may do nothing
but that which is authorized by law. The commonwealth and the civil law
jurisdictions do not share the same constitutional law underpinnings.
Legislative procedure. Another main function of constitutions may be to
describe the procedure by which parliaments may legislate. For instance,
special majorities may be required to alter the constitution. In bicameral
legislatures, there may be a process laid out for second or third readings of
bills before a new law can enter into force. Alternatively, there may further
be requirements for maximum terms that a government can keep power before
holding an election. Study of constitutional law. Constitutional law is a major
focus of legal studies and research. For example, most law students in the
United States are required to take a class in Constitutional Law during their
first year, and several law journals are devoted to the discussion of
constitutional issues. The Rule of Law. The doctrine of the rule of law
dictates that government must be conducted according to law. The Separation of
Powers. The Separation of Powers is often regarded as a second limb functioning
alongside the Rule of Law to curb the powers of the Government. In most modern
nation states, power is divided and vested into three branches of government:
The Executive, the Legislature and the Judiciary. The first and the second are
harmonized in traditional Westminster forms of government.
