Genocide Genocide is "the deliberate and systematic destruction, in whole or in
part, of an ethnic, racial, religious, or national group", though what
constitutes enough of a "part" to qualify as genocide has been subject to much
debate by legal scholars. While a precise definition varies among genocide
scholars, a legal definition is found in the 1948 United Nations Convention on
the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (CPPCG). Article 2 of
this convention defines genocide as "any of the following acts committed with
intent to destroy, in whole or in part, a national, ethnical, racial or
religious group, as such: killing members of the group; causing serious bodily
or mental harm to members of the group; deliberately inflicting on the group
conditions of life, calculated to bring about its physical destruction in whole
or in part; imposing measures intended to prevent births within the group;
forcibly transferring children of the group to another group." Raphael Lemkin
in his masterpiece "Axis Rule in Occupied Europe" (1943) invented the term
"genocide,"by combining "genos" (race, people) and "cide" (to kill). "Generally
speaking, genocide does not necessarily mean the immediate destruction of a
nation, except when accomplished by mass killings of all members of a nation.
It is intended rather to signify a coordinated plan of different actions aiming
at the destruction of essential foundations of the life of national groups,
with the aim of annihilating the groups themselves. The objectives of such a
plan would be the disintegration of the political and social institutions, of
culture, language, national feelings, religion, and the economic existence of
national groups, and the destruction of the personal security, liberty, health,
dignity, and even the lives of the individuals belonging to such groups." The
preamble to the CPPCG states that instances of genocide have taken place
throughout history, but it was not until Raphael Lemkin coined the term and the
prosecution of perpetrators of the Holocaust at the Nuremberg trials that the
United Nations agreed to the CPPCG which defined the crime of genocide under
international law. During a video interview with Raphael Lemkin, the
interviewer asked him about how he came to be interested in this genocide. He
replied; "I became interested in genocide because it happened so many times.
First to the Armenians, then after the Armenians, Hitler took action." There
was a gap of more than forty years between the CPPCG coming into force and the
first prosecution under the provisions of the treaty. To date all international
prosecutions of genocide, the Rwandan Genocide and the Srebrenica Genocide,
have been by "ad hoc" international tribunals. The International Criminal Court
came into existence in 2002 and it has the authority to try people from the
states that have signed the treaty, but to date it has not tried anyone. Since
the CPPCG came into effect in January 1951 about 80 member states of the United
Nations have passed legislation that incorporates the provisions of the CPPCG
into their domestic law, and some perpetrators of genocide have been found
guilty under such municipal laws, such as Nikola Jorgic, who was found guilty
of genocide in Bosnia by a German court ("Jorgic v. Germany"). Critics of the
CPPCG point to the narrow definition of the groups that are protected under the
treaty, particularly the lack of protection for political groups for what has
been termed politicide (politicide is included as genocide under some municipal
jurisdictions). One of the problems was that until there was a body of case law
from prosecutions, the precise definition of what the treaty meant had not been
tested in court, for example, what precisely does the term ""in part"" mean? As
more perpetrators are tried under international tribunals and municipal court
cases, a body of legal arguments and legal interpretations are helping to
address these issues. The exclusion of political groups and politically
motivated violence from the international definition of genocide is
particularly controversial. The reason for this exclusion is because a number
of UN member nations insisted on it when the Genocide Convention was being
drafted in 1948. They argued that political groups are too vaguely defined, as
well as temporary and unstable. They further held that international law should
not seek to regulate or limit political conflicts, since that would give the UN
too much power to interfere in the internal affairs of sovereign nations. In
the years since then, critics have argued that the exclusion of political
groups from the definition, as well as the lack of a specific reference to the
destruction of a social group through the forcible removal of a population, was
designed to protect the Soviet Union and the Western Allies from possible
accusations of genocide in the wake of World War II. Another criticism of the
CPPCG is that when its provisions have been invoked by the United Nations
Security Council, they have only been invoked to punish those who have already
committed genocide and have left a paper trail. It was this criticism that led
to the adoption of UN Security Council Resolution 1674 by the United Nations
Security Council on 28 April 2006 which commits the Council to action to
protect civilians in armed conflict and to protect populations from genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. Genocide scholars
such as Gregory Stanton have postulated that conditions and acts that often
occur before, during, and after genocide—such as dehumanization of victim
groups, strong organization of genocidal groups, and denial of genocide by its
perpetrators—can be identified and actions taken to stop genocides before
they happen. Critics of this approach such as Dirk Moses assert that this is
unrealistic and that, for example, ""Darfur will end when it suits the great
powers that have a stake in the region"". Genocide as a crime. International
law. After the Holocaust, Lemkin successfully campaigned for the universal
acceptance of international laws defining and forbidding genocide. In 1946, the
first session of the United Nations General Assembly adopted a resolution that
"affirmed" that genocide was a crime under international law, but did not
provide a legal definition of the crime. In 1948, the UN General Assembly
adopted the "Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of
Genocide" which legally defined the crime of genocide for the first time. The
first draft of the Convention included political killings, but the USSR along
with some other nations would not accept that actions against groups identified
as holding similar political opinions or social status would constitute
genocide, so these stipulations were subsequently removed in a political and
diplomatic compromise. Intent to destroy. In 2007 the European Court of Human
Rights (ECHR), noted in its judgement on "Jorgic v. Germany" case that in 1992
the majority of legal scholars took the narrow view that "intent to destroy" in
the CPPCG meant the intended physical-biological destruction of the protected
group and that this was still the majority opinion. But the ECHR also noted
that a minority took a broader view and did not consider biological-physical
destruction was necessary as the intent to destroy a national, racial,
religious or ethnical group was enough to qualify as genocide. In the same
judgement the ECHR reviewed the judgements of several international and
municipal courts judgements. It noted that International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia and the International Court of Justice had agreed with
the narrow interpretation, that biological-physical destruction was necessary
for an act to qualify as genocide. The ECHR also noted that at the time of its
judgement, apart from courts in Germany which had taken a broad view, that
there had been few cases of genocide under other Convention States municipal
laws and that "There are no reported cases in which the courts of these States
have defined the type of group destruction the perpetrator must have intended
in order to be found guilty of genocide". In part. The phrase "in whole or in
part" has been subject to much discussion by scholars of international
humanitarian law. The International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
found in "Prosecutor v. Radislav Krstic – Trial Chamber I – Judgment –
IT-98-33 (2001) ICTY8 (2 August 2001)" that Genocide had been committed. In
"Prosecutor v. Radislav Krstic – Appeals Chamber – Judgment – IT-98-33
(2004) ICTY 7 (19 April 2004)" paragraphs 8, 9, 10, and 11 addressed the issue
of "in part" and found that "the part must be a substantial part of that group.
The aim of the Genocide Convention is to prevent the intentional destruction of
entire human groups, and the part targeted must be significant enough to have
an impact on the group as a whole." The Appeals Chamber goes into details of
other cases and the opinions of respected commentators on the Genocide
Convention to explain how they came to this conclusion. The judges continue in
paragraph 12, "The determination of when the targeted part is substantial
enough to meet this requirement may involve a number of considerations. The
numeric size of the targeted part of the group is the necessary and important
starting point, though not in all cases the ending point of the inquiry. The
number of individuals targeted should be evaluated not only in absolute terms,
but also in relation to the overall size of the entire group. In addition to
the numeric size of the targeted portion, its prominence within the group can
be a useful consideration. If a specific part of the group is emblematic of the
overall group, or is essential to its survival, that may support a finding that
the part qualifies as substantial within the meaning of Article 4 the
Tribunal's Statute." In paragraph 13 the judges raise the issue of the
perpetrators' access to the victims: "The historical examples of genocide also
suggest that the area of the perpetrators’ activity and control, as well as
the possible extent of their reach, should be considered. ... The intent to
destroy formed by a perpetrator of genocide will always be limited by the
opportunity presented to him. While this factor alone will not indicate whether
the targeted group is substantial, it can—in combination with other
factors—inform the analysis." CPPCG coming into force. After the minimum 20
countries became parties to the Convention, it came into force as international
law on 12 January 1951. At that time however, only two of the five permanent
members of the UN Security Council (UNSC) were parties to the treaty: France
and the Republic of China. Eventually the Soviet Union ratified in 1954, the
United Kingdom in 1970, the People's Republic of China in 1983 (having replaced
the Taiwan-based Republic of China on the UNSC in 1971), and the United States
in 1988. This long delay in support for the Genocide Convention by the world's
most powerful nations caused the Convention to languish for over four decades.
Only in the 1990s did the international law on the crime of genocide begin to
be enforced. UN Security Council on genocide. UN Security Council Resolution
1674, adopted by the United Nations Security Council on 28 April 2006,
"reaffirms the provisions of paragraphs 138 and 139 of the 2005 World Summit
Outcome Document regarding the responsibility to protect populations from
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity". The
resolution committed the Council to action to protect civilians in armed
conflict. In 2008 the U.N. Security Council adopted resolution 1820, which
noted that “rape and other forms of sexual violence can constitute war
crimes, crimes against humanity or a constitutive act with respect to
genocide”. Municipal law. Since the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (CPPCG) came into effect in January 1951
about 80 member states of the United Nations have passed legislation that
incorporates the provisions of the CPPCG into their municipal law. Criticisms
of the CPPCG and other definitions of genocide. William Schabas has suggested
that a permanent body as recommended by the Whitaker Report to monitor the
implementation of the Genocide Convention, and require States to issue reports
on their compliance with the convention (such as were incorporated into the
United Nations Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture), would make
the convention more effective. Writing in 1998 Kurt Jonassohn and Karin
Björnson stated that the CPPCG was a legal instrument resulting from a
diplomatic compromise. As such the wording of the treaty is not intended to be
a definition suitable as a research tool, and although it is used for this
purpose, as it has an international legal credibility that others lack, other
definitions have also been postulated. Jonassohn and Björnson go on to say
that none of these alternative definitions have gained widespread support for
various reasons. Jonassohn and Björnson postulate that the major reason why no
single generally accepted genocide definition has emerged is because academics
have adjusted their focus to emphasise different periods and have found it
expedient to use slightly different definitions to help them interpret events.
For example Frank Chalk and Kurt Jonassohn studied the whole of human history,
while Leo Kuper and R. J. Rummel in their more recent works concentrated on the
20th century, and Helen Fein, Barbara Harff and Ted Gurr have looked at post
World War II events. Jonassohn and Björnson are critical of some of these
studies arguing that they are too expansive and concludes that the academic
discipline of genocide studies is too young to have a canon of work on which to
build an academic paradigm. The exclusion of social and political groups as
targets of genocide in the CPPCG legal definition has been criticized by some
historians and sociologists, for example M. Hassan Kakar in his book "The
Soviet Invasion and the Afghan Response, 1979–1982" argues that the
international definition of genocide is too restricted, and that it should
include political groups or any group so defined by the perpetrator and quotes
Chalk and Jonassohn: "Genocide is a form of one-sided mass killing in which a
state or other authority intends to destroy a group, as that group and
membership in it are defined by the perpetrator." While there are various
definitions of the term, Adam Jones states that the majority of genocide
scholars consider that "intent to destroy" is a requirement for any act to be
labelled genocide, and that there is growing agreement on the inclusion of the
physical destruction criterion. Barbara Harff and Ted Gurr defined genocide as
"the promotion and execution of policies by a state or its agents which result
in the deaths of a substantial portion of a group ...the victimized groups are
defined primarily in terms of their communal characteristics, i.e., ethnicity,
religion or nationality." Harff and Gurr also differentiate between genocides
and politicides by the characteristics by which members of a group are
identified by the state. In genocides, the victimized groups are defined
primarily in terms of their communal characteristics, i.e., ethnicity, religion
or nationality. In politicides the victim groups are defined primarily in terms
of their hierarchical position or political opposition to the regime and
dominant groups. Daniel D. Polsby and Don B. Kates, Jr. state that "... we
follow Harff's distinction between genocides and 'pogroms,' which she describes
as 'short-lived outbursts by mobs, which, although often condoned by
authorities, rarely persist.' If the violence persists for long enough,
however, Harff argues, the distinction between condonation and complicity
collapses." According to R. J. Rummel, genocide has 3 different meanings. The
ordinary meaning is murder by government of people due to their national,
ethnic, racial, or religious group membership. The legal meaning of genocide
refers to the international treaty, the "Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide". This also includes non-killings that in
the end eliminate the group, such as preventing births or forcibly transferring
children out of the group to another group. A generalized meaning of genocide
is similar to the ordinary meaning but also includes government killings of
political opponents or otherwise intentional murder. It is to avoid confusion
regarding what meaning is intended that Rummel created the term democide for
the third meaning. A major criticism of the international community's response
to the Rwandan Genocide was that it was reactive, not proactive. The
international community has developed a mechanism for prosecuting the
perpetrators of genocide but has not developed the will or the mechanisms for
intervening in a genocide as it happens. Critics point to the Darfur conflict
and suggest that if anyone is found guilty of genocide after the conflict
either by prosecutions brought in the International Criminal Court or in an "ad
hoc" International Criminal Tribunal, this will confirm this perception.
International prosecution of genocide. By ad hoc tribunals. All signatories to
the CPPCG are required to prevent and punish acts of genocide, both in peace
and wartime, though some barriers make this enforcement difficult. In
particular, some of the signatories—namely, Bahrain, Bangladesh, India,
Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, the United States, Vietnam, Yemen, and
Yugoslavia—signed with the proviso that no claim of genocide could be brought
against them at the International Court of Justice without their consent.
Despite official protests from other signatories (notably Cyprus and Norway) on
the ethics and legal standing of these reservations, the immunity from
prosecution they grant has been invoked from time to time, as when the United
States refused to allow a charge of genocide brought against it by Yugoslavia
following the 1999 Kosovo War. It is commonly accepted that, at least since
World War II, genocide has been illegal under customary international law as a
peremptory norm, as well as under conventional international law. Acts of
genocide are generally difficult to establish for prosecution, because a chain
of accountability must be established. International criminal courts and
tribunals function primarily because the states involved are incapable or
unwilling to prosecute crimes of this magnitude themselves. Nuremberg Tribunal
(1945–1946). Because the universal acceptance of international laws, defining
and forbidding genocide was achieved in 1948, with the promulgation of the
"Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide" (CPPCG),
those criminals who were prosecuted after the war in international courts, for
taking part in the Holocaust were found guilty of crimes against humanity and
other more specific crimes like murder. Nevertheless the Holocaust is
universally recognized to have been a genocide and the term, that had been
coined the year before by Raphael Lemkin, appeared in the indictment of the 24
Nazi leaders, Count 3, stated that all the defendants had "conducted deliberate
and systematic genocide—namely, the extermination of racial and national
groups..." International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (1993 to
present (2014 is the scheduled end date)). The term "Bosnian Genocide" is used
to refer either to the genocide committed by Serb forces in Srebrenica in 1995,
or to ethnic cleansing that took place during the 1992–1995 Bosnian War (an
interpretation rejected by a majority of scholars). In 2001 the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) judged that the 1995
Srebrenica massacre was an act of genocide. On 26 February 2007 the
International Court of Justice (ICJ), in the "Bosnian Genocide Case" upheld the
ICTY's earlier finding that the Srebrenica massacre constituted genocide, but
found that the Serbian government had not participated in a wider genocide on
the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina during the war, as the Bosnian
government had claimed. On 12 July 2007, European Court of Human Rights when
dismissing the appeal by Nikola Jorgic against his conviction for genocide by a
German court (Jorgic v. Germany) noted that the German courts wider
interpretation of genocide has since been rejected by international courts
considering similar cases. The ECHR also noted that in the 21st century
"Amongst scholars, the majority have taken the view that ethnic cleansing, in
the way in which it was carried out by the Serb forces in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in order to expel Muslims and Croats from their homes, did not
constitute genocide. However, there are also a considerable number of scholars
who have suggested that these acts did amount to genocide" About 30 people have
been indicted for participating in genocide or complicity in genocide during
the early 1990s in Bosnia. To date after several plea bargains and some
convictions that were successfully challenged on appeal two men, Vujadin
Popović and Ljubiša Beara, have been found guilty of genocide, and two
others, Radislav Krstic and Drago Nikolic, have been found guilty of aiding and
abetting genocide. Three others have been found guilty of participating in
genocides in Bosnia by German courts, one of whom Nikola Jorgic lost an appeal
against his conviction in the European Court of Human Rights. A further eight
men, former members of the Bosnian Serb security forces were found guilty of
genocide by the State Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina (See List of Bosnian
genocide prosecutions). Slobodan Milosevic, as the former President of Serbia
and of Yugoslavia was the most senior political figure to stand trial at the
ICTY. He died on 11 March 2006 during his trial where he was accused of
genocide or complicity in genocide in territories within Bosnia and
Herzegovina, so no verdict was returned. In 1995 the ICTY issued a warrant for
the arrest of Bosnian Serbs Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic on several
charges including genocide. On 21 July 2008, Karadzic was arrested in Belgrade,
and he is currently in The Hague on trial accused of genocide among other
crimes. Ratko Mladic was arrested on 26 May 2011 by Serbian special police in
Lazarevo, Serbia. International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (1994 to present
(2012 is the scheduled end date)). The International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) is a court under the auspices of the United Nations for the
prosecution of offenses committed in Rwanda during the genocide which occurred
there during April 1994, commencing on 6 April. The ICTR was created on 8
November 1994 by the Security Council of the United Nations in order to judge
those people responsible for the acts of genocide and other serious violations
of the international law performed in the territory of Rwanda, or by Rwandan
citizens in nearby states, between 1 January and 31 December 1994. So far, the
ICTR has finished nineteen trials and convicted twenty seven accused persons.
On 14 December 2009 two more men were accused and convicted for their crimes.
Another twenty five persons are still on trial. Twenty-one are awaiting trial
in detention, two more added on 14 December 2009. Ten are still at large. The
first trial, of Jean-Paul Akayesu, began in 1997. In October 1998, Akayesu was
sentenced to life imprisonment. Jean Kambanda, interim Prime Minister, pled
guilty. Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia (2003 to present). The
Khmer Rouge, led by Pol Pot, Ta Mok and other leaders, organized the mass
killing of ideologically suspect groups. The total number of victims is
estimated at approximately 1.7 million Cambodians between 1975–1979,
including deaths from slave labour. On 6 June 2003 the Cambodian government and
the United Nations reached an agreement to set up the Extraordinary Chambers in
the Courts of Cambodia (ECCC) which would focus exclusively on crimes committed
by the most senior Khmer Rouge officials during the period of Khmer Rouge rule
of 1975–1979. The judges were sworn in early July 2006. The investigating
judges were presented with the names of five possible suspects by the
prosecution on 18 July 2007. There has been disagreement between some of the
international jurists and the Cambodian government over whether any other
people should be tried by the Tribunal. By the International Criminal Court. To
date all international prosecutions for genocide have been brought in specially
convened international tribunals. Since 2002, the International Criminal Court
can exercise its jurisdiction if national courts are unwilling or unable to
investigate or prosecute genocide, thus being a "court of last resort," leaving
the primary responsibility to exercise jurisdiction over alleged criminals to
individual states. Due to the United States concerns over the ICC, the United
States prefers to continue to use specially convened international tribunals
for such investigations and potential prosecutions. Darfur, Sudan. There has
been much debate over categorizing the situation in Darfur as genocide. The on-
going conflict in Darfur, Sudan, which started in 2003, was declared a
"genocide" by United States Secretary of State Colin Powell on 9 September 2004
in testimony before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. Since that time
however, no other permanent member of the UN Security Council followed suit. In
fact, in January 2005, an International Commission of Inquiry on Darfur,
authorized by UN Security Council Resolution 1564 of 2004, issued a report to
the Secretary-General stating that "the Government of the Sudan has not pursued
a policy of genocide." Nevertheless, the Commission cautioned that "The
conclusion that no genocidal policy has been pursued and implemented in Darfur
by the Government authorities, directly or through the militias under their
control, should not be taken in any way as detracting from the gravity of the
crimes perpetrated in that region. International offences such as the crimes
against humanity and war crimes that have been committed in Darfur may be no
less serious and heinous than genocide." In March 2005, the Security Council
formally referred the situation in Darfur to the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, taking into account the Commission report but
without mentioning any specific crimes. Two permanent members of the Security
Council, the United States and China, abstained from the vote on the referral
resolution. As of his fourth report to the Security Council, the Prosecutor has
found "reasonable grounds to believe that the individuals identified the UN
Security Council Resolution 1593 have committed crimes against humanity and war
crimes," but did not find sufficient evidence to prosecute for genocide. In
April 2007, the Judges of the ICC issued arrest warrants against the former
Minister of State for the Interior, Ahmad Harun, and a Militia Janjaweed
leader, Ali Kushayb, for crimes against humanity and war crimes. On 14 July
2008, prosecutors at the International Criminal Court (ICC), filed ten charges
of war crimes against Sudan's President Omar al-Bashir: three counts of
genocide, five of crimes against humanity and two of murder. The ICC's
prosecutors claimed that al-Bashir "masterminded and implemented a plan to
destroy in substantial part" three tribal groups in Darfur because of their
ethnicity. On 4 March 2009, the ICC issued a warrant of arrest for Omar Al
Bashir, President of Sudan as the ICC Pre-Trial Chamber I concluded that his
position as head of state does not grant him immunity against prosecution
before the ICC. The warrant was for war crimes and crimes against humanity. It
did not include the crime of genocide because the majority of the Chamber did
not find that the prosecutors had provided enough evidence to include such a
charge. Genocide in history. The preamble to the CPPCG states that "genocide is
a crime under international law, contrary to the spirit and aims of the United
Nations and condemned by the civilized world," and that "at all periods of
history genocide has inflicted great losses on humanity." In many cases where
accusations of genocide have circulated, partisans have fiercely disputed such
an interpretation and the details of the event. This often leads to the
promotion of vastly different versions of the event in question. Revisionist
attempts to deny or challenge claims of genocides are illegal in some
countries. For example, several European countries ban denying the Holocaust,
whilst in Turkey it is illegal to refer to mass killings of Armenians, Greeks
and Assyrians by the Ottoman Empire towards the end of the First World War as a
genocide. Stages of genocide, influences leading to genocide, and efforts to
prevent it. In 1996 Gregory Stanton, the president of Genocide Watch, presented
a briefing paper called "The 8 Stages of Genocide" at the United States
Department of State. In it he suggested that genocide develops in eight stages
that are "predictable but not inexorable". The Stanton paper was presented at
the State Department, shortly after the Rwanda genocide and much of the
analysis is based on why that genocide occurred. The preventative measures
suggested, given the original target audience, were those that the United
States could implement directly or use their influence on other governments to
have implemented. In April 2012, it was reported that Stanton would soon be
officially adding two new stages, Discrimination and Persecution, to his
original theory, which would make for a 10-stage theory of genocide. Other
authors have focused on the structural conditions leading up to genocide and
the psychological and social processes that create an evolution toward
genocide. Helen Fein showed that pre-existing anti-Semitism and systems that
maintained anti-Semitic policies was related to the number of Jews killed in
different European countries during the Holocaust. Ervin Staub showed that
economic deterioration and political confusion and disorganization were
starting points of increasing discrimination and violence in many instances of
genocides and mass killing. They lead to scapegoating a group and ideologies
that identified that group as an enemy. A history of devaluation of the group
that becomes the victim, past violence against the group that becomes the
perpetrator leading to psychological wounds, authoritarian cultures and
political systems, and the passivity of internal and external witnesses
(bystanders) all contribute to the probability that the violence develops into
genocide. Intense conflict between groups that is unresolved, becomes
intractable and violent can also lead to genocide. The conditions that lead to
genocide provide guidance to early prevention, such as humanizing a devalued
group,creating ideologies that embrace all groups, and activating bystander
responses. There is substantial research to indicate how this can be done, but
information is only slowly transformed into action. Cultural genocide. The
precise definition of "cultural genocide" remains unclear. The term was
proposed by lawyer Raphael Lemkin in 1933 as a component to genocide, which he
called "vandalism". The drafters of the 1948 Genocide Convention considered the
use of the term, but dropped it under strong opposition from western countries,
especially the United Kingdom, who feared that too broad a definition of
genocide could implicate its activity in its colonies.
