Green Revolution Green Revolution refers to a series of research, development,
and technology transfer initiatives, occurring between the 1940s and the late
1970s, that increased agriculture production around the world, beginning most
markedly in the late 1960s. The initiatives, led by Norman Borlaug, the "Father
of the Green Revolution" credited with saving over a billion people from
starvation, involved the development of high-yielding varieties of cereal
grains, expansion of irrigation infrastructure, modernization of management
techniques, distribution of hybridized seeds, synthetic fertilizers, and
pesticides to farmers. The term "Green Revolution" was first used in 1968 by
former United States Agency for International Development (USAID) director
William Gaud, who noted the spread of the new technologies and said,  History.
The agricultural development that began in Mexico by Norman Borlaug in 1943
(based on Nazareno Strampelli's studies) had been judged as a success and the
Rockefeller Foundation sought to spread it to other nations. The Office of
Special Studies in Mexico became an informal international research institution
in 1959, and in 1963 it formally became CIMMYT, The International Maize and
Wheat Improvement Center. In 1961 India was on the brink of mass famine.
Borlaug was invited to India by the adviser to the Indian minister of
agriculture M. S. Swaminathan. Despite bureaucratic hurdles imposed by India's
grain monopolies, the Ford Foundation and Indian government collaborated to
import wheat seed from CIMMYT. Punjab was selected by the Indian government to
be the first site to try the new crops because of its reliable water supply and
a history of agricultural success. India began its own Green Revolution program
of plant breeding, irrigation development, and financing of agrochemicals.
India soon adopted IR8 ‚Äì a semi-dwarf rice variety developed by the
International Rice Research Institute (IRRI) that could produce more grains of
rice per plant when grown with certain fertilizers and irrigation. In 1968,
Indian agronomist S.K. De Datta published his findings that IR8 rice yielded
about 5 tons per hectare with no fertilizer, and almost 10 tons per hectare
under optimal conditions. This was 10 times the yield of traditional rice. IR8
was a success throughout Asia, and dubbed the "Miracle Rice". IR8 was also
developed into Semi-dwarf IR36. In the 1960s, rice yields in India were about
two tons per hectare; by the mid-1990s, they had risen to six tons per hectare.
In the 1970s, rice cost about $550 a ton; in 2001, it cost under $200 a ton.
India became one of the world's most successful rice producers, and is now a
major rice exporter, shipping nearly 4.5¬ million tons in 2006. IR8 and the
Philippines. In 1960, the Government of the Republic of the Philippines with
Ford and Rockefeller Foundations established IRRI (International Rice Research
Institute). A rice crossing between Dee-Geo-woo-gen and Peta was done at IRRI
in 1962. In 1966, one of the breeding lines became a new cultivar, IR8. IR8
required the use of fertilizers and pesticides, but produced substantially
higher yields than the traditional cultivars. Annual rice production in the
Philippines increased from 3.7 to 7.7¬ million tons in two decades. The switch
to IR8 rice made the Philippines a rice exporter for the first time in the 20th
century. But the heavy pesticide use reduced the number of fish and frog
species found in rice paddies. CGIAR. In 1970, foundation officials proposed a
worldwide network of agricultural research centers under a permanent
secretariat. This was further supported and developed by the World Bank; on 19
May 1971, the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research was
established, co-sponsored by the FAO, IFAD and UNDP. CGIAR, has added many
research centers throughout the world. CGIAR has responded, at least in part,
to criticisms of Green Revolution methodologies. This began in the 1980s, and
mainly was a result of pressure from donor organizations. Methods like
Agroecosystem Analysis and Farming System Research have been adopted to gain a
more holistic view of agriculture. Methods like Rapid Rural Appraisal and
Participatory Rural Appraisal have been adopted to help scientists understand
the problems faced by farmers and even give farmers a role in the development
process. Problems in Africa. There have been numerous attempts to introduce the
successful concepts from the Mexican and Indian projects into Africa. These
programs have generally been less successful. Reasons cited include widespread
corruption, insecurity, a lack of infrastructure, and a general lack of will on
the part of the governments. Yet environmental factors, such as the
availability of water for irrigation, the high diversity in slope and soil
types in one given area are also reasons why the Green Revolution is not so
successful in Africa. A recent program in western Africa is attempting to
introduce a new high-yield variety of rice known as "New Rice for Africa"
(NERICA). NERICAs yield about 30% more rice under normal conditions, and can
double yields with small amounts of fertilizer and very basic irrigation.
However the program has been beset by problems getting the rice into the hands
of farmers, and to date the only success has been in Guinea where it currently
accounts for 16% of rice cultivation. After a famine in 2001 and years of
chronic hunger and poverty, in 2005 the small African country of Malawi
launched the "Agricultural Input Subsidy Program" by which vouchers are given
to smallholder farmers to buy subsidized nitrogen fertilizer and maize seeds.
Within its first year, the program was reported with extreme success, producing
the largest maize harvest of the country's history; enough to feed the country
with tons of maize left over. The program has advanced yearly ever since.
Various sources claim that the program has been an unusual success, hailing it
as a "miracle". Agricultural production and food security. Technologies. The
Green Revolution spread technologies that had already existed before, but had
not been widely used outside industrialized nations. These technologies
included modern irrigation projects, pesticides, synthetic nitrogen fertilizer
and improved crop varieties developed through the conventional, science-based
methods available at the time. The novel technological development of the Green
Revolution was the production of novel wheat cultivars. Agronomists bred
cultivars of maize, wheat, and rice that are generally referred to as HYVs or
‚Äúhigh-yielding varieties‚Äù. HYVs have higher nitrogen-absorbing potential
than other varieties. Since cereals that absorbed extra nitrogen would
typically lodge, or fall over before harvest, semi-dwarfing genes were bred
into their genomes. A Japanese dwarf wheat cultivar (Norin 10 wheat), which was
sent to Washington, D.C. by Cecil Salmon, was instrumental in developing Green
Revolution wheat cultivars. IR8, the first widely implemented HYV rice to be
developed by IRRI, was created through a cross between an Indonesian variety
named ‚ÄúPeta‚Äù and a Chinese variety named ‚ÄúDee-geo-woo-gen.‚Äù With
advances in molecular genetics, the mutant genes responsible for "Arabidopsis
thaliana" genes (GA 20-oxidase, "ga1", "ga1-3"), wheat reduced-height genes
("Rht") and a rice semidwarf gene ("sd1") were cloned. These were identified as
gibberellin biosynthesis genes or cellular signaling component genes. Stem
growth in the mutant background is significantly reduced leading to the dwarf
phenotype. Photosynthetic investment in the stem is reduced dramatically as the
shorter plants are inherently more stable mechanically. Assimilates become
redirected to grain production, amplifying in particular the effect of chemical
fertilizers on commercial yield. HYVs significantly outperform traditional
varieties in the presence of adequate irrigation, pesticides, and fertilizers.
In the absence of these inputs, traditional varieties may outperform HYVs.
Therefore, several authors have challenged the apparent superiority of HYVs not
only compared to the traditional varieties alone, but by contrasting the
monocultural system associated with HYVs with the polycultural system
associated with traditional ones. Production increases. Cereal production more
than doubled in developing nations between the years 1961‚Äì1985. Yields of
rice, maize, and wheat increased steadily during that period. The production
increases can be attributed roughly equally to irrigation, fertilizer, and seed
development, at least in the case of Asian rice. While agricultural output
increased as a result of the Green Revolution, the energy input to produce a
crop has increased faster, so that the ratio of crops produced to energy input
has decreased over time. Green Revolution techniques also heavily rely on
chemical fertilizers, pesticides and herbicides, some of which must be
developed from fossil fuels, making agriculture increasingly reliant on
petroleum products. Proponents of the Peak Oil theory fear that a future
decline in oil and gas production would lead to a decline in food production or
even a Malthusian catastrophe. Effects on food security. The effects of the
Green Revolution on global food security are difficult to assess because of the
complexities involved in food systems. The world population has grown by about
four billion since the beginning of the Green Revolution and many believe that,
without the Revolution, there would have been greater famine and malnutrition.
India saw annual wheat production rise from 10 million tons in the 1960s to
73¬ million in 2006. The average person in the developing world consumes
roughly 25% more calories per day now than before the Green Revolution. Between
1950 and 1984, as the Green Revolution transformed agriculture around the
globe, world grain production increased by over 250%. The production increases
fostered by the Green Revolution are often credited with having helped to avoid
widespread famine, and for feeding billions of people. There are also claims
that the Green Revolution has decreased food security for a large number of
people. One claim involves the shift of subsistence-oriented cropland to
cropland oriented towards production of grain for export or animal feed. For
example, the Green Revolution replaced much of the land used for pulses that
fed Indian peasants for wheat, which did not make up a large portion of the
peasant diet. Criticism. Food security. Malthusian criticism. Some criticisms
generally involve some variation of the Malthusian principle of population.
Such concerns often revolve around the idea that the Green Revolution is
unsustainable, and argue that humanity is now in a state of overpopulation with
regards to the sustainable carrying capacity and ecological demands on the
Earth. Although 36 million people die each year as a direct or indirect result
of hunger and poor nutrition, Malthus' more extreme predictions have frequently
failed to materialize. In 1798 Thomas Malthus made his prediction of impending
famine. The world's population had doubled by 1923 and doubled again by 1973
without fulfilling Malthus' prediction. Malthusian Paul R. Ehrlich, in his 1968
book "The Population Bomb", said that "India couldn't possibly feed two hundred
million more people by 1980" and "Hundreds of millions of people will starve to
death in spite of any crash programs." Ehrlich's warnings failed to materialize
when India became self-sustaining in cereal production in 1974 (six years
later) as a result of the introduction of Norman Borlaug's dwarf wheat
varieties. Since supplies of oil and gas are essential to modern agriculture
techniques, a fall in global oil supplies could cause spiking food prices in
the coming decades. Famine. To some modern Western sociologists and writers,
increasing food production is not synonymous with increasing food security, and
is only part of a larger equation. For example, Harvard professor Amartya Sen
claimed large historic famines were not caused by decreases in food supply, but
by socioeconomic dynamics and a failure of public action. However, economist
Peter Bowbrick disputes Sen's theory, arguing that Sen relies on inconsistent
arguments and contradicts available information, including sources that Sen
himself cited. Bowbrick further argues that Sen's views coincide with that of
the Bengal government at the time of the Bengal famine of 1943, and the
policies Sen advocates failed to relieve the famine. Quality of diet. Some have
challenged the value of the increased food production of Green Revolution
agriculture. Miguel A. Altieri, (a pioneer of agroecology and peasant-
advocate), writes that the comparison between traditional systems of
agriculture and Green Revolution agriculture has been unfair, because Green
Revolution agriculture produces monocultures of cereal grains, while
traditional agriculture usually incorporates polycultures. These monoculture
crops are often used for export, feed for animals, or conversion into biofuel.
According to Emile Frison of Bioversity International, the Green Revolution has
also led to a change in dietary habits, as fewer people are affected by hunger
and die from starvation, but many are affected by malnutrition such as iron or
vitamin-A deficiencies. Frison further asserts that almost 60% of yearly deaths
of children under age five in developing countries are related to malnutrition.
High-yield rice (HYR), introduced since 1964 to poverty-ridden Asian countries,
such as the Philippines, was found to have inferior flavor and be more
glutinous and less savory than their native varieties. This caused its price to
be lower than the average market value. In the Philippines the introduction of
heavy pesticides to rice production, in the early part of the Green Revolution,
poisoned and killed off fish and weedy green vegetables that traditionally
coexisted in rice paddies. These were nutritious food sources for many poor
Filipino farmers prior to the introduction of pesticides, further impacting the
diets of locals. Political impact. The primary objective of the program was
geopolitical: to provide food for the populace in undeveloped countries and so
bring social stability and weaken the fomenting of communist insurgency. Citing
internal Foundation documents, Dowie states that the Ford Foundation had a
greater concern than Rockefeller in this area. There is significant evidence
that the Green Revolution weakened socialist movements in many nations. In
countries such as India, Mexico, and the Philippines, "technological solutions"
were sought as an alternative to expanding "agrarian reform" initiatives, the
latter of which were often linked to socialist politics. Socioeconomic impacts.
The transition from traditional agriculture, in which inputs were generated on-
farm, to Green Revolution agriculture, which required the purchase of inputs,
led to the widespread establishment of rural credit institutions. Smaller
farmers often went into debt, which in many cases results in a loss of their
farmland. The increased level of mechanization on larger farms made possible by
the Green Revolution removed a large source of employment from the rural
economy. Because wealthier farmers had better access to credit and land, the
Green Revolution increased class disparities, with the rich‚Äìpoor gap widening
as a result. Because some regions were able to adopt Green Revolution
agriculture more readily than others (for political or geographical reasons),
interregional economic disparities increased as well. Many small farmers are
hurt by the dropping prices resulting from increased production overall.
However, large-scale farming companies only account for less than 10% of the
total farming capacity. The new economic difficulties of small holder farmers
and landless farm workers led to increased rural-urban migration. The increase
in food production led to a cheaper food for urban dwellers, and the increase
in urban population increased the potential for industrialization.
Globalization. In the most basic sense, the Green Revolution was a product of
globalization as evidenced in the creation of international agricultural
research centers that shared information, and with transnational funding from
groups like the Rockefeller Foundation, Ford Foundation, and United States
Agency for International Development (USAID). Additionally, the inputs required
in Green Revolution agriculture created new markets for seed and chemical
corporations, many of which were based in the United States. For example,
Standard Oil of New Jersey established hundreds of distributors in the
Philippines to sell agricultural packages composed of HYV seed, fertilizer, and
pesticides. Environmental impact. Pesticides. Green Revolution agriculture
relies on extensive use of pesticides, which are necessary to limit the high
levels of pest damage that inevitably occur in monocropping ‚Äì the practice of
producing or growing one single crop over a wide area. Biodiversity. The spread
of Green Revolution agriculture affected both agricultural biodiversity and
wild biodiversity. There is little disagreement that the Green Revolution acted
to reduce agricultural biodiversity, as it relied on just a few high-yield
varieties of each crop. This has led to concerns about the susceptibility of a
food supply to pathogens that cannot be controlled by agrochemicals, as well as
the permanent loss of many valuable genetic traits bred into traditional
varieties over thousands of years. To address these concerns, massive seed
banks such as Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research‚Äôs
(CGIAR) International Plant Genetic Resources Institute (now Bioversity
International) have been established (see Svalbard Global Seed Vault). There
are varying opinions about the effect of the Green Revolution on wild
biodiversity. One hypothesis speculates that by increasing production per unit
of land area, agriculture will not need to expand into new, uncultivated areas
to feed a growing human population. However, land degradation and soil
nutrients depletion have forced farmers to clear up formerly forested areas in
order to keep up with production. A counter-hypothesis speculates that
biodiversity was sacrificed because traditional systems of agriculture that
were displaced sometimes incorporated practices to preserve wild biodiversity,
and because the Green Revolution expanded agricultural development into new
areas where it was once unprofitable or too arid. For example, the development
of wheat varieties tolerant to acid soil conditions with high aluminium
content, permitted the introduction of agriculture in sensitive Brazilian
ecosystems as Cerrado semi-humid tropical savanna and Amazon rainforest in the
geoeconomic macroregions of Centro-Sul and Amaz√¥nia. Before the Green
Revolution, other Brazilian ecosystems were also significantly damaged by human
activity, such as the once 1st or 2nd main contributor to Brazilian
megadiversity Atlantic Rainforest (above 85% of deforestation in the 1980s,
about 95% after 2010s) and the important xeric shrublands called Caatinga
mainly in the Northeastern Brazil (about 40% in the 1980s, about 50% after
2010s ‚Äî deforestation of the Caatinga biome is generally associated with
greater risks of desertification). Nevertheless, the world community has
clearly acknowledged the negative aspects of agricultural expansion as the 1992
Rio Treaty, signed by 189 nations, has generated numerous national Biodiversity
Action Plans which assign significant biodiversity loss to agriculture's
expansion into new domains. Health impact. The consumption of the pesticides
used to kill pests by humans in some cases may be increasing the likelihood of
cancer in some of the rural villages using them. Poor farming practices
including non-compliance to usage of masks and over-usage of the chemicals
compound this situation. In 1989, WHO and UNEP estimated that there were around
1 million human pesticide poisonings annually. Some 20,000 (mostly in
developing countries) ended in death, as a result of poor labeling, loose
safety standards etc. Pesticides and cancer. Long term exposure to pesticides
such as organochlorines, creosote, and sulfate have been correlated with higher
cancer rates and organochlorines DDT, chlordane, and lindane as tumor promoters
in animals. Contradictory epidemiologic studies in humans have linked phenoxy
acid herbicides or contaminants in them with soft tissue sarcoma (STS) and
malignant lymphoma, organochlorine insecticides with STS, non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma (NHL), leukemia, and, less consistently, with cancers of the lung and
breast, organophosphorous compounds with NHL and leukemia, and triazine
herbicides with ovarian cancer. Punjab case. The Indian state of Punjab
pioneered green revolution among the other states transforming India into a
food-surplus country. The state is witnessing serious consequences of intensive
farming using chemicals and pesticide. A comprehensive study conducted by Post
Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research (PGIMER) has underlined
the direct relationship between indiscriminate use of these chemicals and
increased incidence of cancer in this region. An increase in the number of
cancer cases has been reported in several villages including Jhariwala,
Koharwala, Puckka, Bhimawali, and Khara. Environmental activist Vandana Shiva
has written extensively about the social, political and economic impacts of the
Green Revolution in Punjab. She claims that the Green Revolution's reliance on
heavy use of chemical inputs and monocultures has resulted in water scarcity,
vulnerability to pests, and incidents of violent conflict and social
marginalization. In 2009, under a Greenpeace Research Laboratories
investigation, Dr Reyes Tirado, from the University of Exeter, UK conducted the
study in 50 villages in Muktsar, Bathinda and Ludhiana districts revealed
chemical, radiation and biological toxicity rampant in Punjab. Twenty percent
of the sampled wells showed nitrate levels above the safety limit of 50¬ mg/l,
established by WHO, the study connected it with high use of synthetic nitrogen
fertilizers. With increasing poisoning of the soil, the region once hailed as
the home to the Green Revolution, now due to excessive use of chemical
fertilizer, is being termed by one columnist as the "Other Bhopal". Organic
farming. About four decades after the Green Revolution widely helped the world
to be able to produce food in sufficient levels, a small percentage of farmers
in India have chosen to employ organic farming methods in response to side
effects from their adoption of modern agriculture techniques. Norman Borlaug's
response to criticism.
