Heimatvertriebene Heimatvertriebene (German for "expellees", literally
"homeland displaced person") are those around 12 million German citizens (no
matter of which ethnicity) and ethnic Germans (no matter of which citizenship)
who fled or were expelled after World War II from parts of Germany annexed by
Poland and the Soviet Union (today Russia), and from other countries (the so-
called einheitliches Vertreibungsgebiet; i.e. uniform territory of expulsion),
who found refuge in both West and East Germany, and Austria. Refugees who had
fled voluntarily but were later refused permission to return are often not
distinguished from those who were forcibly deported. By the definition of the
West German Federal Expellee Law, enacted on 19 May 1953, refugees of German
citizenship or German ethnicity, whose return to their home places was denied,
were treated like expellees, thus the frequent general usage of the term
expellees for refugees alike. Distinguished are refugees and expellees who had
neither German citizenship nor German ethnicity but as a matter of fact had
fled or been expelled from their former domiciles and stranded in West Germany
or West Berlin before 1951. They were taken care of – as part of the
displaced persons – by international refugee organisations until 1951 and
then by West German authorities granting them the extra status of heimatloser
Ausländer with preferential naturalisation rules, distinct from other legal
aliens or stateless people. Occupational functionaries and other German
expatriates, who had moved to German-annexed or German-occupied foreign
territory only due to the war were not considered expellees by law unless they
showed circumstances (such as marrying a resident of the respective area)
providing for the intention to settle abroad also for the time after the war.
Besides the narrow legal definition for the Heimatvertriebene, there were also
other groups accepted as Vertriebene (expellees) such as the Aussiedler. These
comprised refugees and emigrants either originally of foreign citizenship but
of German ethnicity, or who themselves or whose ancestors had involuntarily
lost German citizenship, coming from the above-mentioned uniform territory of
expulsion or from Albania, Bulgaria, China, Romania, the Soviet Union, or
Yugoslavia, and arriving only after the end of general expulsions but not later
as 31 December 1992. In a document signed in 1950 the "Heimatvertriebene"
organisations recognised the plight of the different groups of people living in
today's Poland who were resettled there by force. The Heimatvertriebene are
just one (but by far the largest) of the groups of millions of other people,
from many different countries, who all found refuge in today's Germany. Some of
the expellees are active in politics and belong to the political right wing.
Many others do not belong to any organizations, but they continue to maintain
what they call a lawful right to their homeland. The vast majority pledged to
work peacefully towards that goal while rebuilding post-war Germany and Europe.
The expellees are still highly active in German politics, and are one of the
major social groups of the nation, with around 2 million members. The president
of the Federation of Expellees is a member of the Bundestag. Although expellees
and their descendants were active in West German politics, the prevailing
political climate within West Germany was that of atonement for Nazi actions.
However the CDU governments have shown considerable support for the expellees
and German civilian victims. Expellee towns. As a result of the huge influx of
expellees, there was a massive increase of population in some areas such as
Mecklenburg (where population numbers doubled), and in some places the previous
homogeneity of the population was broken by Protestant expellees moving to a
purely Catholic area or conversely. The population numbers of a number of small
settlements in West Germany exploded permanently due to a refugee camp on their
territory or nearby. Examples of this phenomenon include "Neugablonz", a
quarter of Kaufbeuren in Bavaria, founded by the expellees and named after
Gablonz (Jablonec nad Nisou). Neugablonz nowadays makes up a third of the
town's population. An extreme example of the population explosion is
Neutraubling (also in Bavaria), which had 53 inhabitants in 1947, 1300 in 1951,
and 3800 in 1960. Since the refugee camps were mostly located on the sites of
former hidden ammunition factories, most of these "Vertriebenenstädte" are
located in a (former) forest. See also Espelkamp.
