History of Mexican Americans Mexican-Americans were once concentrated in the
states that formerly belonged to Mexico, including California, Arizona, New
Mexico, Colorado and Texas; they began creating communities in Southern
California (Los Angeles, California, Long Beach, California, Santa Ana,
California, San Bernardino, California and San Diego, California); San
Francisco, California; Denver, Colorado; Dallas, Texas; Houston, Texas; San
Antonio, Texas; Phoenix, Arizona and other industrial cities and steel
producing regions when they obtained employment there during World War I. More
recently, Mexican immigrants have increasingly become a large part of the
workforce in industries such as meat packing throughout the Midwest, in
agriculture in the southeastern United States, and in the construction,
landscaping, restaurant, hotel and other service industries throughout the
country.Mexican-American identity has also changed markedly throughout these
years. In the past hundred years Mexican-Americans have campaigned for voting
rights, stood against educational, employment, and ethnic discrimination and
stood for economic and social advancement. At the same time many Mexican-
Americans have struggled with defining and maintaining their community's
identity. In the 1960s and 1970s, some Hispanic student groups flirted with
nationalism and differences over the proper name for members of the community
of Chicano/Chicana, Latino/Latina, Mexican-Americans, Hispanics or simply La
Raza became tied up with deeper disagreements over whether to integrate into or
remain separate from Anglo society, as well as divisions between those Mexican-
Americans whose families had lived in the United States for two or more
generations and more recent immigrants. Before the founding of the United
States Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, Nevada, Utah, California, Colorado, and
Wyoming were part of the Viceroyalty of New Spain and later formed part of the
newly independent Mexican Republic. The Spaniards first entered the region in
the late 16th century, starting small settlements in what is now New Mexico. In
California, Spanish Franciscan friars formed a string of missions designed to
convert the Indians to Christianity. Along with the system of forts and land
grants to favored associates of the king, the missions enabled small-scale
Spanish settlement of the coastal California by a few hundred Spanish
immigrants. Very small Spanish-speaking settlements were established near
missions & forts in Arizona, New Mexico, Colorado and Texas by the mid 18th
century. Manifest Destiny and the incorporation of the Hispanic people.
Beginning in the 1820s, immigrants from the U.S. and Europe settled in Texas
(Tejas), then part of Mexico. Anglo and Hispanic Texas joined to fight Mexico
in 1836, defeating an invading army and declaring the independence of Texas.
The Texas Republic included Tejanos as leading citizens, but Mexico refused to
recognize its legal existence. The US annexed Texas in 1845, leading to the
Mexican-American War of 1846-48. After six months of harsh negotiating, the
Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo was signed on February 2, 1848, ending the U.S.-
Mexican War (1846-1848). It represented so much more than just an end to
hostilities, however. The war had been over territory — specifically, most of
the southwestern portion of today's United States. Much of that land
historically had been controlled by Spain and then Mexico after they had taken
the land from the Mayans who had already been living there. But in 1845, both
the United States and Mexico claimed to control portions of the same territory.
The U.S. government rallied the country to war after declaring that Mexicans
had "shed American blood upon American soil" in the disputed territory. While
there were some Americans who considered the war with Mexico illegal and
immoral, others considered it the nation's destiny to pursue the war. This
policy claimed that it was the United States' right to expand westward across
North America and settle the land. In the end, Mexico gave up more than 500,000
square miles of territory, which today comprises Arizona, California, Nevada,
New Mexico, Texas, Utah, and parts of Colorado and Wyoming. The United States
later gained additional territory — a strip of land in New Mexico and Arizona
— as a result of a treaty James Gadsden concluded with Mexico in 1853. With
this huge increase in land ownership acquired through a sense of entitlement,
the United States firmly established itself as a nation that extended from
coast to coast. The shift in ownership of this vast amount of territory also
was partly responsible for another war. In the United States, the issue of
slavery in the new territories upset the delicate political balance between
slave states and free states. Unable to resolve its differences, the nation
eventually was torn apart by a devastating civil war in 1848. Together with the
Gadsden Purchase in 1853, the Treaty extended U.S. control over a wide range of
territory once held by Mexico, including the present day states of Texas, New
Mexico, Colorado, Utah, Nevada, Arizona, and California. The vast majority of
Hispanic populations chose to stay and become full US citizens. By and large,
the Hispanic populations of these areas supported the new government. The
Mexican government had become despotic under on-and-off-again President General
Santa Anna, and the US Government offered protection from Indian raids that
Mexico had not prevented, meaning an end to civil wars of the sort that
continuously wracked Mexico until 1920, and it promised much greater long-run
prosperity. Although the treaty promised that the landowners in this newly
acquired territory would enjoy full enjoyment and protection of their property
as if they were citizens of the United States, many former citizens of Mexico
lost their land in lawsuits before state and federal courts or as a result of
legislation passed after the treaty. Even those statutes intended to protect
the owners of property at the time of the extension of the United States'
borders, such as the 1851 California Land Act, had the effect of dispossessing
Californio owners ruined by the cost of maintaining litigation over land titles
for years. The loss of property rights in New Mexico created a largely landless
population that resented the powers that had taken their land. After the Santa
Fe Ring succeeded in dispossessing thousands of landholders in New Mexico,
groups such as Las Gorras Blancas tore down fences or burned down interlopers'
farm buildings. In western Texas the political struggle sparked an armed
conflict in which the Tejano majority forced the surrender of the Texas
Rangers, but in the end lost their influence, offices, and economic
opportunities. In other areas, particularly California, the Hispanic residents
were simply overwhelmed by the number of Anglo settlers who rushed in, first in
Northern California as a result of the California Gold Rush, then decades later
by the boom in Southern California. Anglo miners drove Hispanic miners out of
their camps, barred non-Anglos from testifying in court and imposed
exclusionary standards similar to what was called Jim Crow in the case of
African-Americans. Some Hispanics, of whom Joaquín Murieta was a legendary
example and Tiburcio Vásquez a real one, responded by resorting to banditry.
During the Gold Rush, there was an immigration of Mexican miners to California.
About 20,000 Tejanos lived in South Texas in the 1850s. The social structure
has been analyzed by historian Radolph Campbell ["Gone to Texas: A History of
the Lone Star State" 2003 p 190-1] Cartmen lived in San Antonio or along the
route from that city to Indianola and earned their living by transporting food
and merchandise from the coast to the interior. Using oxcarts, they virtually
monopolized this particular freight route by moving goods quickly and cheaply.
Anglo competitors appeared by the 1850s but were unable to match the rates
charged by the Tejanos. Carting appears to have been the most lucrative
business open to poorer Tejanos during these years In parts of south Texas and
southern Arizona, Hispanic Americans were able to obtain positions within local
government while in New Mexico Hispanic Americans remained an absolute majority
of the population until the end of the 19th century. The federal government
delayed granting statehood to New Mexico because of its Hispanic American
political leadership. Despite integration, Hispanic Americans managed to retain
their Spanish language and culture. They were most successful in those areas
where they had retained some measure of political or economic power, where Jim
Crow laws imposed a forced isolation or where immigrants from Mexico made up a
significant percentage of the community. Anti-Mexican American violence (1840s
to 1920s). The lynching of Mexicans and Mexican Americans in the Southwest has
long been overlooked in American history. This may be due to the fact that most
historical records categorized Mexicans, Italians, Native Americans, and
sometimes Chinese lynching victims as white. It is estimated that at least 597
Mexican Americans were lynched between 1848 and 1928. Mexicans were lynched at
a rate of 27.4 per 100,000 of population between 1880 and 1930. This statistic
is second only to that of the African American community during that period,
which suffered an average of 37.1 per 100,000 population. Between 1848 to 1879,
Mexicans were lynched at an unprecedented rate of 473 per 100,000 of
population. Most of these lynchings were not instances of "frontier
justice"—of the 597 total victims, only 64 were lynched in areas which lacked
a formal judicial system. The majority of lynching victims were denied access
to a trial while others were convicted in unfair trials. During the California
Gold Rush, as many as 25,000 Mexicans arrived in California. Many of these
Mexicans were experienced miners and had great success mining gold in
California. Some Anglos perceived their success as a threat and intimidated
them with violence. Between 1848 and 1860, at least 163 Mexicans were lynched
in California alone. One particularly infamous lynching occurred on July 5,
1851 when a Mexican woman named Josefa Segovia was lynched by a mob in
Downieville, California. She was accused of killing a white man who had
attempted to assault her after breaking into her home. The Texas Rangers were
also known to brutally repress the Mexican-American population in Texas.
Historians estimate that hundreds, perhaps even thousands of Mexicans and
Mexican Americans were killed by the Texas Rangers. Anti-Mexican mob violence
and intimidation resulted in Mexicans being displaced from their lands, denied
access to natural resources, and becoming politically disenfranchised.
Immigration and diffusion of Mexican-American communities throughout the U.S..
Hispanic Americans made up a significant number of workers in a number of
industries, particularly the railroad and mining industries in the southwestern
U.S., that led to the growth of communities throughout the region. The
employment needs of the railroad industry in the late 19th century brought
Mexican immigrants from more remote regions of Mexico, while the new systems
integrated the border regions of the United States and Mexico. The railroad
also led to the economic development of those parts of the US, drawing Mexican
immigrants in large numbers into agriculture in the early 20th century,
establishing a pattern that continued thereafter. These largely male Mexican
immigrants also established "colonias" in the early 20th century in places such
as Chicago, Kansas City and Salt Lake City, Utah as railroad employment took
them further within the United States. Mexican-Americans and Mexican immigrants
also moved in large numbers to Denver, the San Francisco Bay area, and to a
lesser extent to Detroit, Minneapolis and the Monongahela Valley, Pennsylvania,
during World War I to work in the steel and automobile manufacturing industry.
Others began migrating from South Texas to work in cotton fields elsewhere in
Texas and Oklahoma, and from Southern California went to work in summer
harvests of groves and orchards in Oregon and the Yakima Valley, Washington.
More recently, beginning in significant numbers in the 1970s, Mexican
immigrants have moved in large numbers to the Midwest U.S., attracted by jobs
in the packinghouse industry, and to the southeastern U.S., where they have
displaced many African-Americans and contract workers from the Caribbean in
agriculture and related industries. This large wave of Mexican immigration are
attracted to low-paid labor jobs and an equally high number moved to low-income
communities, such as industrial suburbs of Los Angeles in ethnic neighborhoods
known as "barrios" and the agricultural sector of Imperial Valley, California.
The Big Swing. In Texas, people of Hispanic ethnicity, most of whom were
Mexican nationals, began arriving in greater numbers between 1900 and 1930.
Adding to the number of older Hispanic residents already in Texas, some of whom
had been here since the Spanish Colonial Era, many of these new immigrants
engaged in cotton production by performing the back-breaking work of hoeing
cotton fields clean of weeds and harvesting the mature crop during the summer
and fall. These resilient people established themselves in communities where
earlier Hispanics already existed. From settlements in The Rio Grande Valley,
in South Texas, communities in the Nueces Strip-between Three Rivers and Corpus
Cristi, Texas-and the interior city of San Antonio, Hispanics ventured outward
following the maturing cotton crop north and west. From Caldwell County in view
of the state's capitol, Hispanics migrated in extended family groups west in
pursuit of the maturing cotton crop. By late December most cotton harvesting in
western Texas counties, such as Concho, Runnels, Coke, Nolan and Mitchell
counties had been completed. Hispanic families then returned home to their
communities in time to celebrate Christmas. Because these families sojourned
north then west and finally back south on their yearly trek, this odyssey is
known as "The Big Swing". Along the route many younger family members decided
to stay behind, mostly because they fell in love with someone who was local or
had acquired a year-round job with a farmer or rancher. This led to increased
diversity in western and northern Texas. From Lubbock to San Angelo, Hispanics
now form an integral part of their local communities by performing jobs as
teachers, nurses, doctors, lawyers, and administrators as well as other
important jobs that contribute to their local economies. The Mexican
Revolution. The Mexican Revolution affected Mexican-Americans in a number of
ways. The turmoil in Mexico caused hundreds of thousands of refugees to flee to
the U.S. (1910–1917), while some demographers placed the figure at one
million at the time period. The revolution also fueled animosities between the
United States and Mexican governments while threatening the interests of U.S.
businesses operating in Mexico. Mexican revolutionaries, from Venustiano
Carranza to Ricardo Flores Magon, operated on both sides of the border during
this era. The Wilson administration actively intervened in Mexico in these
years, sending troops to Veracruz, Veracruz. When Pancho Villa's troops killed
seventeen U.S. mining engineers in Chihuahua, then crossed the border and
killed a number of soldiers and civilians in a raid on Columbus, New Mexico,
the federal government sent General John J. Pershing on a punitive expedition
to capture or defeat Villa. A purported plan to liberate those regions formerly
held by Mexico and to drive out all Anglo residents and persistent rumors that
Mexico was receiving aid from Germany inflamed public sentiment in the United
States even further. Mexican Immigration in the 20th Century. Mexican-Americans
are often descendants of Mexican immigrants who moved into the U.S. in high
numbers since 1890. Many first arrived as agricultural laborers in farming
valleys of the southern ends of the border states of California, especially the
Imperial Valley; Arizona, especially Tucson; New Mexico; and Texas, especially
the Rio Grande Valley. Anglo-Americans hired Mexicans and U.S. born Mexicans to
work in the region's year-round agricultural economy, most notably in tomatoes,
carrots, lettuce, grapes, strawberries and citrus fruit. Mexican farm laborers
along with African Americans, Filipino Americans, Japanese-Americans, and even
Armenian Americans, Native Hawaiians and American Indians were highly
instrumental and contributed to California to became the nation's leading
agricultural state in the 20th century. Large-scale emigration from central
Mexico to the United States began in the 1920s. Mexico was exempted from the
system of quotas created by the Immigration Act of 1924, with U.S. politicians
hoping to dissuade the revolutionary government from carrying out the
nationalization the nation's oil reserves decreed in the 1917 Constitution of
Mexico. In 1926, the anti-clerical policies of Plutarco Elías Calles led to a
rebellion by Catholic ranchers and peasants in Jalisco and Michoacán, known as
the Cristero War. The rebellion spread to thirteen states across the center of
Mexico, with upwards of 50,000 people taking up arms to defend the Catholic
Church. Although they failed to capture any major cities, the federal army was
unable to defeat these mounted guerillas. Between 1926 and 1930, the Cristiada
War claimed 70,000 lives, led to the internal migration of 200,000 people, as
well as the external emigration (mostly to the U.S.) of over 450,000 people.
'The establishment of a major Mexican presence in California dates back to
these years.' Mexicans met the increasing demand for cheap labor on the West
Coast after draconian restrictions were imposed on Asian immigration. During
this period, Mexicans began to migrate to areas outside the Southwest; they
were imported to work in the steel mills of Chicago during a strike in 1919,
and again in 1923. Many would find work on the assembly lines of automobile
factories in Detroit, and in the meat-packing plants of Chicago and Kansas
City. During the Great Depression, the U.S. INS adopted a policy of
repatriation; some 400,000 Mexican immigrants and their children left (among
some 2 million European immigrants as well, according to Abraham Hoffman,
author of "Unwanted Mexican Americans"). Texas used Rangers to forcibly evict
Mexicans who refused to accept voluntary repatriation, while Illinois, Indiana
and Michigan paid for special trains to take Mexicans to the border. When the
U.S. entered World War II, it turned to Mexico to address wartime labor
shortages. In August 1942 the Bracero Program was initiated, allowing for the
importation of temporary contract laborers from Mexico. Over the following two
decades, more than 4 million Mexican farm-workers arrived in the U.S. under
this guest worker program, most of them destined for the cotton-fields and
orchards of California's Central Valley and the Pacific Northwest, and the
ranches and sugar beet farms of the Midwest. Texas chose to opt out of the
Bracero program and hire farm-workers directly from Mexico. At its height, over
437,000 guest-workers entered the U.S. annually under the Bracero Program,
which was discontinued in 1964, as the invention of a mechanical cotton
harvester reduced labor needs, and scandals over the exploitation of guest
workers led the Department of Labor official overseeing the program to denounce
it as 'legalized slavery'. The Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965 set
strict quotas on the number of persons who could legally enter the U.S. from
Latin American nations, and most new Mexican migration to the U.S. in the 1960s
and 1970s was temporary and short-term. Since the 1980s, Mexican migration has
increased dramatically. The Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 granted
amnesty to illegal immigrants who had resided in the U.S. before 1982, while
imposing penalties on employers who hired illegal immigrants. Several factors
led to an increase in Mexican immigration to the U.S. The Latin American debt
crisis of the 1980s led to high rates of unemployment in Mexico and destroyed
the savings of a large portion of the middle-class, as did the 1994 Mexican
Peso Crisis. In 1991, Mexican president Carlos Salinas dismantled the
communally-owned ejidos, one of the most important legacies of the Mexican
Revolution, and the enactment of NAFTA brought a flood of subsidized U.S. corn
into the Mexican market, driving down grain prices and forcing hundreds of
thousands of people from rural areas to migrate in search of better economic
opportunities. The 2000 Census showed that the foreign-born population of the
U.S. increased by 11.3 million people in the 1990s, and Mexican immigrants
accounted for 43% of that growth. The region which had the fastest-growing
immigrant population was the Southeast, where many Mexicans who found work in
construction, as migrant agricultural laborers, and in textile mills and
chicken processing plants. The Latino populations of Georgia, North and South
Carolina, and Arkansas increased between 300 and 400 per cent from 1990 to
2000. Labor struggles. Mexican-American workers formed unions of their own and
joined integrated unions throughout the 20th century. The Industrial Workers of
the World (IWW) was particularly active in organizing Mexican-American farm
workers and hard rock miners the first three decades of that century, in
Arizona and elsewhere. In 1917, many of them were expelled in the Bisbee
Deportation. The first recorded strike led by Mexican-Americans was in the
start of the 20th century in Southern California. There, a small group of
Mexican farm laborers along with Japanese-Americans organized strikes in 1905
near Oxnard, California located in Ventura County, California but were not
successful in meeting demands for better wages and working conditions. From
about 1902 to 1914, the United Mine Workers of America (UMWA) attempted to
organize coal miners in Colorado. In 1927, Mexican-American coal miners
participated in a bloody coal strike in Colorado, walking out under the banner
of the IWW. Mexican-Americans in the southeastern part of the state,
particularly from the Walsenburg, Pueblo, and Trinidad areas, took leadership
roles in the 1927 strike. Phil Goodstein, Slaughter in Serene: the Columbine
Coal Strike Reader, 2005, page 110. The UMWA returned to northern Colorado in
1928, just weeks after a machine-gun massacre of strikers, when Josephine
Roche, president of the Rocky Mountain Fuel Company, invited the AFL-affiliated
organization to take the place of the more radical IWW. The Communist Party-
affiliated Cannery and Agricultural Workers Industrial Union led a massive
strike of cotton pickers in California in 1933; that strike was defeated after
mass arrests and the murder of several strikers. The movie "Salt of the Earth"
depicts another strike, waged by the mostly Mexican-American members of the
Mine Mill and Smelter Workers; the movie itself became an important document in
the later Chicano movement. The most significant union struggle involving
Mexican-Americans was the United Farm Workers' long strike and boycott aimed at
grape growers in the San Joaquin and Coachella Valleys in the late 1960s,
followed by campaigns to organize lettuce workers in California and Arizona,
farm workers in Texas, and orange grove workers in Florida. While the union
suffered severe setbacks in California in 1973 and never established a strong
union presence in other states, its struggle propelled César Chávez and
Dolores Huerta into national prominence, while providing the foot soldiers who
helped increase the visibility of Mexican-Americans within the Democratic Party
in California and elect a number of Mexican-American candidates in the 1970s
and 1980s. More recently, the Service Employees International Union has led a
number of successful "Justice for Janitors" campaigns throughout the United
States among predominantly immigrant workers, many of whom have come from
Mexico and Central America. Those campaigns do not stress cultural or ethnic
identity in the way that the UFW did, but have linked immigrant workers'
struggles with the political interests of Mexican-Americans in many
communities, such as Los Angeles. The IWW is also once again organizing,
particularly among Troquero truck drivers and immigrant taxi drivers in the Los
Angeles, California area. The civil rights movement. Tejanos — Texans of
Spanish and/or Mexican descent — formed several organizations in the early
20th century to protect themselves from official and private discrimination,
but made only partial progress in addressing the worst forms of official ethnic
discrimination. One of those organizations, the League of United Latin American
Citizens formed in 1929, remains active today. The movement to overturn the
many forms of state-sponsored discrimination directed at Hispanic Americans was
strongest in Texas during the first fifty years of the 20th century. The
movement picked up steam after World War II, when groups such as the American
G.I. Forum, formed by returning veterans, joined in the efforts of
organizations such as LULAC to demand an end to segregated schools and denial
of the right to vote. Hispanic Americans brought several legal cases against
school segregation in San Antonio and Corpus Christi, Texas, in the 1940s and
similar battles in San Diego and Orange County, California. During The Great
Depression, the United States government sponsored a Mexican Repatriation
program which was intended to encourage people to voluntarily move to Mexico,
but thousands were deported against their will. More than 500,000 individuals
repatriated (only a small portion were deported), approximately 60 percent of
which were actually United States citizens or residents. In the post-war
McCarthy era, the Justice Department launched Operation Wetback, whoch deported
over 70,000 illegals and resulted in over 700,000 leaving voluntarily. Mexican-
Americans, mestizos especially, also faced heightened racism during World War
II, most famously during the Zoot Suit Riots, when sailors in Los Angeles
attacked Mexican-American youths in 1943, and in the Sleepy Lagoon Case, in
which a number of young men were wrongly convicted in a case marked by
sensationalized press coverage and overt racism from the prosecution and judge.
That trial and verdict, overturned on appeal after a broad-based committee was
created to support the defendants, is depicted in Luis Valdez' play and film
"Zoot Suit". At the same time, the United States was importing thousands of
Mexican farm workers under the Bracero program that used them as temporary
labor, without employment rights. According to the National World War II
Museum, between 250,000 and 500,000 Hispanic Americans served in the Armed
Forces during WWII. Thus, Hispanic Americans comprised 2.3% to 4.7% of the
Army. The exact number, however is unknown as at the time Hispanics were
classified as whites. Generally Mexican American World War II servicemen were
integrated into regular military units. However, many Mexican American war
veterans were discriminated against and even denied medical services by the
United States Department of Veterans Affairs when they arrived home. In 1948,
war veteran Dr Hector P. Garcia founded the American GI Forum to address the
concerns of Mexican American veterans who were being discriminated against. The
AGIF's first campaign was on the behalf of Felix Longoria, a Mexican American
private who was killed in the Philippines in the line of duty. Upon the return
of his body to his hometown of Three Rivers, Texas, he was denied funeral
services because he was Mexican American. Mexican American school children were
subject to racial segregation in the public school system. They were forced to
attend "Mexican schools" in California. In 1947, the Mendez v. Westminster
ruling declared that segrating children of "Mexican and Latin descent" in
Orange County and the state of California was unconstitutional. This ruling
helped lay the foundation for the landmark Brown v Board of Education case
which ended racial segregation in the public school system. In many counties in
the Southwestern United States, Mexican Americans were not selected as jurors
in court cases which involved a Mexican American defendant. In 1954, Pete
Hernandez, an agricultural worker, was indicted of murder by an all-Anglo jury
in Jackson County, Texas. Hernandez believed that the jury could not be
impartial unless members of other races were allowed on the jury-selecting
committees, seeing that a Mexican American had not been on a jury for more than
25 years in that particular county. Hernandez and his lawyers decided to take
the case to the Supreme Court. The Hernandez v. Texas Supreme Court ruling
declared that Mexican Americans and other racial groups in the United States
were entitled to equal protection under the 14th Amendment of the U.S.
Constitution. The most prominent civil rights organization in the Mexican-
American community is the Mexican American Legal Defense and Educational Fund
(MALDEF), founded in 1968. Although modeled after the NAACP Legal Defense and
Educational Fund, MALDEF has also taken on many of the functions of other
organizations, including political advocacy and training of local leaders. The
Chicano movement. The Chicano movement blossomed in the 1960s. The movement had
roots in the civil rights struggles that had preceded it, adding to it the
cultural and generational politics of the era. The early proponents of the
movement — Rodolfo Gonzales in Denver, Colorado and Reies Tijerina in New
Mexico — adopted a historical account of the preceding hundred and twenty-
five years that obscured much of Mexican-American history. Gonzales and
Tijerina embraced a form of nationalism that was based on the failure of the
United States government to live up to the promises that it had made in the
Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo. That version of the past did not, on the other
hand, take into account the history of those Mexicans who had immigrated to the
United States. It also gave little attention to the rights of illegal
immigrants in the United States in the 1960s — not surprising, since
immigration did not have the political significance it was to acquire in the
years to come. It was only a decade later when activists embraced the rights of
illegal immigrants and helped broaden the focus to include their rights.
Instead, when the movement dealt with practical problems most activists focused
on the most immediate issues confronting Mexican-Americans: unequal educational
and employment opportunities, political disenfranchisement, and police
brutality. In the heady days of the late 1960s, when the student movement was
active around the globe, the Chicano movement brought about more or less
spontaneous actions, such as the mass walkouts by high school students in
Denver and East Los Angeles in 1968 and the Chicano Moratorium in Los Angeles
in 1970. The movement was particularly strong at the college level, where
activists formed MEChA, "el Movimiento Estudiantil Chicano de Aztlán", which
promoted Chicano Studies programs and a generalized nationalist agenda. The
student movement produced a generation of future political leaders, including
Richard Alatorre and Cruz Bustamante in California. Some women who worked
within the Chicano movement felt that participants were more worried about
other issues, such as immigration, than solving problems that affected women.
This led Chicanas to form the Comisión Femenil Mexicana Nacional in 1970. By
the mid 1980s to our present day, a major focus of the Chicano movement has
been to advance the representation of Chicanos in all American mainstream
media. Criticism of the American mainstream news media and U.S. educational
institutions by Chicano activists has been particularly harsh in recent years
subsequent to the massive displays of support for immigrant rights such as that
seen during La Gran Marcha (The Great March) on March 25, 2006 in Los Angeles.
As of today, this self-proclaimed "largest march in U.S. history" which was
primarily organized by Mexican American organizations, Chicano activists, and
fueled through a large network of active Internet users, L.A. Spanish language
television, and Spanish language news radio coverage, is still virtually
ignored by American mainstream (English language) news media and all textbooks
of the American educational system. Mexican-Americans and electoral politics.
In 1963, in Crystal City, Texas the mainly Mexican-American migrant community
together with the support of the Teamsters Union and the Political Association
of Spanish Speaking Organizations (PASSO), an outgrowth of the Viva Kennedy
clubs of 1960, encouraged Mexican-American men and women to pay their poll tax
and choose their own candidates. Led by Teamsters business agent and cannery
employee, Juan Cornejo, five Mexican-Americans, despite harassment from the
infamous Texas Rangers, won the support of their community young and old alike
who thanks to the protection provided by the Teamsters and PASSO mobilized for
electoral victory. This "revolt" was covered nationwide and reported in the New
York Times and the Wall Street Journal. This election led Americans outside of
the Southwest to take note of America's other minority community as a political
force. As a result of the Voting Rights Act, followed up by intensive political
organizing, Mexican-Americans were able to achieve a new degree of political
power and representation in Texas and elsewhere in the Southwest. The La Raza
Unida Party, headed by José Ángel Gutiérrez of Crystal City, Texas made
startling progress in the poorest regions in the Rio Grande Valley with its
base of operations at Crystal City, Texas in the early 1970s, spreading for a
while to Colorado, Wisconsin, California, Michigan, Oregon, Kansas, Illinois
and several other states. The party faded in the mid 1970s and held on only in
Crystal City, Texas before collapsing in the early 1980s. Veterans from the
party, such as Willie Velasquez, became active in Democratic politics and in
organizing projects such as the Southwest Voter Registration Education Project,
which boosted the electoral fortunes of Mexican-American candidates throughout
the Southwest. Results came more slowly in California, on the other hand:
although Los Angeles had a significant Mexican-American population,
gerrymandering eliminated the seat held by Edward R. Roybal, the only Mexican-
American member of the Los Angeles City Council, in 1959. La Raza Unida Party
campaigns in the early 1970s had the practical effect of defeating Mexican-
American Democratic candidates, embittering many activists against the party
and the form of nationalism it represented. It would be more than twenty years
before another Mexican-American was elected to the Los Angeles City Council and
it would take litigation to permit a Mexican-American to win election to the
Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors in the 1980s, the first Mexican-
American to join that body in more than a century. In the 1990s, Mexican-
American politicians held high offices throughout California. In 2005, Antonio
Villaraigosa was elected mayor of Los Angeles, the first Latino in 130 years to
hold the seat. Voters have elected a number of governors of Mexican-American
descent in the Southwest, including Jerry Apodaca and Bill Richardson in New
Mexico and Raúl Castro in Arizona. Colorado voters recently elected Ken
Salazar as the first Mexican-American Senator from that state. Cruz Bustamante
was the first lieutenant governor of California in 130 years from his election
in 1999 to 2007, but Bustamante lost the gubernatorial election to Austrian-
born actor Arnold Schwarzenegger, who went on to be state governor. Mexican-
Americans have also achieved some degree of political recognition in Chicago,
where they make up roughly 75% of a Hispanic community that also includes
significant numbers of Puerto Ricans and immigrants from other Spanish-speaking
countries. That predominantly Mexican-American community has elected Luis
Gutierrez, whose ancestry is Puerto Rican, to represent it in Congress and a
number of Mexican-American politicians at the state and local level. Mexican-
Americans tend to vote Democratic (in 1960, the John F. Kennedy presidential
campaign boosted the Mexican American vote to over 80% for Kennedy), although
the Republican Party has made determined efforts in the years after 1980 to
reverse that trend. Mexican-Americans in particular, despite being a large
voting bloc, have a very poor voter turnout. References. Handbook of Texas
History Online Hispanic Influx Causing Cultural Shift Across South
