Irredentism Irredentism (from Italian "irredento", "unredeemed") is any
position advocating annexation of territories administered by another state on
the grounds of common ethnicity or prior historical possession, actual or
alleged. It is often advocated by pan-nationalist movements and is a feature of
identity politics, cultural and political geography. Because most borders have
been moved and redrawn over time, a great many countries could theoretically
present irredentist claims to their neighbors. Germany's Anschluss of Austria
and annexation of German-speaking Sudetenland from Czechoslovakia in 1938 and a
return of territory from Czechoslovakia to Hungary as a result of the First
Vienna Award are perhaps historical examples of this idea in practice. However,
some states are the subject of potential irredentism from their inception.
Post–World War I Eastern Europe, the Balkans, and the Near East had borders
carved out by the Allies that left many of the new states in that region
unsatisfied due to minority populations and conflicting historical claims. Many
of Africa's borders were artificially imposed by European colonial powers. The
result split ethnic groups between different countries, such as the Yoruba who
are divided between Nigeria and Benin. In some cases, the irredentist
argumentation continued well past the Second World War and on to the present
day. An area that may be subjected to a potential claim is therefore sometimes
called an irredenta. Not all irredentas are involved in actual irredentism.
Origins. The word was coined in Italy from the phrase "Italia irredenta"
("unredeemed Italy"). This originally referred to Austro-Hungarian rule over
mostly or partly Italian-inhabited territories such as Trentino, Trieste,
Istria and Dalmatia during the 19th and early 20th century. A common way to
express a claim to adjacent territories on the grounds of historical or ethnic
association is by using the epithet "Greater" before the country name. This
conveys the image of national territory at its maximum conceivable extent with
the country "proper" at its core. The use of "Greater" does not always convey
an irredentistic meaning. During the unification of Germany, the term
"Großdeutschland" (or greater Germany) referred to a possible German nation
consisting of the states that later comprised the Second German Empire "and"
Austria; the term "lesser" Germany, or small Germany, or "Kleindeutschland",
referred to a possible German state without Austria. The term was also used by
Germans referring to Greater Germany, a state consisting of pre World War I
Germany, actual Austria and the Sudetenland. Constitutional irredentism. Some
states formalize their irredentist claims by including them in their
constitutional documents. Afghanistan. The Afghan border with Pakistan, known
as the Durand Line, was arbitrarily drawn by colonial officials of the British
Empire in 1893 following the Second Afghan War. Accordingly, the Pashtun tribes
inhabiting the border areas were arbitrarily divided; the tribes have never
accepted the still-porous border. The Durand Line was not intended as a
permanent border, and clashes broke out in the 1950s and 1960s between
Afghanistan and Pakistan over the issue. All Afghan governments of the past
century have declared, with varying intensity, a long-term goal of re-uniting
all Pashtun-dominated areas under Afghan rule. Argentina. The Argentine
government has maintained a claim over the Falkland Islands since 1833, and
renewed it as recently as June 2009. It considers the archipelago part of the
Tierra del Fuego Province, along with South Georgia and the South Sandwich
Islands. Bolivia. The 2009 constitution of Bolivia states that the country has
an unrenounceable right over the territory that gives it access to the Pacific
Ocean and its maritime space. This is understood as Chilean territory that
Bolivia and Peru ceded after the War of the Pacific which left Bolivia a
landlocked country. People's Republic of China. The preamble to the
Constitution of the People's Republic of China states "Taiwan is part of the
sacred territory of the People's Republic of China. It is the lofty duty of the
entire Chinese people, including our compatriots in Taiwan, to accomplish the
great task of reunifying the motherland." The PRC claim to sovereignty over
Taiwan is generally based on the successor state theory, with the PRC claiming
that it is the successor state to the Republic of China. Republic of China
(Taiwan). Article 4 of the Constitution of the Republic of China originally
stated that "he territory of the Republic of China within its existing national
boundaries shall not be altered except by a resolution of the National
Assembly", although recent constitutional changes have moved this power to that
of a national referendum. The PRC's influence in international organizations
prevents Taiwan from participating in many such organizations. In some
organizations the Republic of China is able to participate as Chinese Taipei.
The PRC has an extensive missile build-up near Taiwan and passed an Anti-
Secession Law in 2005 threatening to use force. Throughout the 1950s and 1960s,
the ROC government on Taiwan maintained itself to be the legitimate ruler of
Mainland China. As part of its current policy of 'status quo', the ROC has not
renounced claims over the territories currently controlled by the People's
Republic of China, Mongolia, and Tuvan Republic in Russia, Northern Burma and
some Central Asian states bordering areas. However, the ROC does not actively
pursue these claims in practice; the remaining claims that the ROC are actively
seeking are the Senkaku Islands, whose sovereignty is also asserted by Japan
and the PRC; and the Spratly Islands in South China Sea, with multiple
claimants. Comoros. Article 1 of the Constitution of the Union of the Comoros
begins: "The Union of the Comoros is a republic, composed of the autonomous
islands of Mohéli, Mayotte, Anjouan, and Grande Comore." Mayotte,
geographically a part of the Comoro Islands, was the only island of the four to
vote against independence from France (independence losing 37%-63%) in the
referendum held December 22, 1974. The total vote was 94%-5% in favor of
independence. Mayotte is currently a "departmental collectivity" of the French
Republic. India. All of the European colonies on the Indian subcontinent which
were not part of the British Raj have been annexed by the Republic of India
since it gained its independence from the British Empire. An example of such
territories was the 1961 Indian annexation of Goa and Indian integration of
Junagadh. Akhand Bharat is another irridentist call for "undivided India" to
include Pakistan and Bangladesh into India to form a Hindu Rashtra raised by
mainstream Indian political organization Vishva Hindu Parishad (VHP), Rashtriya
Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) and Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP). From 1956 after King
of Kashmir ceded to India entirely resulting from a Pakistani invasion of
Kashmir earlier, India has claimed the entire area of Kashmir as part of their
state's "national territory." Meanwhile Pakistan has claimed almost all of the
state except for the portion of the state Pakistan ceded to China. Both
currently administer large sections of the area, and the two countries have
fought multiple wars over the area. India and Pakistan aspire to take Pakistan-
administered Kashmir, and Indian-administered Kashmir, respectively, so that
Kashmir may be re-united under their respective rule. Indonesia. Indonesia
claimed all territories of the former Dutch East Indies, and previously viewed
British plans to group the Straits Settlements, the Federated Malay States, the
Unfederated Malay States, Sarawak and British North Borneo into a new
independent federation of Malaysia as a threat to its objective to create a
united state called Greater Indonesia. The Indonesian opposition of Malaysian
formation has led to Indonesia-Malaysia confrontation in early 1960s. It had
also held Portuguese Timor from 1975 to 2002, based on irredentist claims. The
idea of uniting former British and Dutch colonial possessions in Southeast Asia
actually has its roots in the early 20th century, as the concept of Greater
Malay ("Melayu Raya") was coined in British Malaya espoused by students and
graduates of Sultan Idris Training College for Malay Teachers in the late
1920s. Some of political figures in Indonesia including Muhammad Yamin and
Sukarno revived the idea in the 1950s and named the political union concept as
Greater Indonesia. Ireland. From 1937 until 1998, Articles 2 and 3 of the
Constitution of Ireland provided that "national territory consists of the whole
island of Ireland". However, "[pending the re-integration of the national
territory", the powers of the state were restricted to legislate only for the
area that had ceded from the United Kingdom. Arising from the Northern Ireland
peace process, the matter was mutually resolved in 1998. The Republic of
Ireland's constitution was altered by referendum and its territorial claim to
Northern Ireland was dropped. The amended constitution asserts that while it is
the entitlement of "every person born in the island of Ireland … to be part
of the Irish Nation" and to hold Irish citizenship, "a united Ireland shall be
brought about only by peaceful means with the consent of a majority of the
people, democratically expressed, in both jurisdictions in the island." Certain
joint policy and executive bodies were created between Northern Ireland, the
part of the island that remained in the United Kingdom, and the Republic of
Ireland, and these were given executive authority. The advisory and
consultative role of the government of Ireland in the government of Northern
Ireland granted by the United Kingdom, that had begun with the 1985 Anglo-Irish
Agreement, was maintained. The two states also settled the long-running dispute
concerning their respective names: "Ireland" and the "United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland", with both governments agreeing to use those
names. Israel. The entire area of the West Bank and Gaza, previously annexed by
Jordan and occupied by Egypt respectively, was controlled by Israel from the
1967 war until August 2005, when Israel withdrew from Gaza. Israel never
explicitly claimed any of the West Bank for its own state except the city of
Jerusalem, which it unilaterally annexed in 1980. However, Israel has settled
hundreds of thousands of its citizens in various Israeli controlled settlements
in the West Bank. Article 3 of the Basic Law of the Palestinian Authority,
which was ratified in 2002 by the Palestinian National Authority and serves as
an interim constitution, states that "Jerusalem is the capital of Palestine."
The Israeli annexing instrument, the Jerusalem Law—one of the Basic Laws of
Israel that "serve in the place of a constitution"—declares Jerusalem,
"complete and united", to be the capital of Israel, creating a conflict with
Palestinian claims. "De facto", the Palestinian government administers the
parts of the West Bank that Israel has granted it authority over from Ramallah,
while the Gaza Strip is administered from Gaza. According to United Nations
Resolutions 242 and 338, East Jerusalem is part of the occupied territories.
The United States does not recognize Israeli sovereignty over East Jerusalem
and maintains its embassy in Tel Aviv. In Jerusalem, the United States
maintains a Consulate General as a diplomatic representation to the city of
Jerusalem alone, separate from the US's representation to the state of Israel.
The Consulate General maintains two buildings in the city as they were
established before the 1967 war, one building on what was the Israeli side and
one on what was the Jordanian-annexed side of Jerusalem. Korea. Since their
founding, both Korean states have disputed the legitimacy of the other. South
Korea's constitution claims jurisdiction over the entire Korean peninsula. It
acknowledges the division of Korea only indirectly by requiring the president
to work for reunification. North Korea's constitution also stresses the
importance of reunification, but makes no similar claim to the entire
peninsula. United States. The first constitution of the United States, the
Articles of Confederation, included a provision in Article XI to allow the
admission of Canada as a state. Other irredentism. Until the Nineteenth
Amendment of the Constitution of Ireland in 1998 the Irish Republic claimed the
territory of six counties that form Northern Ireland. Spain claims the British
overseas territory of Gibraltar, ceded to Britain in perpetuity in 1713 under
the Treaty of Utrecht, and argues its case at the United Nations claiming its
territorial integrity is affected. During World War II, the Spanish Falangist
media agitated for irredentism claiming for Spain the French Navarre, French
Basque Country and Roussillon (French Catalonia) as well. Morocco makes similar
claims against Spain over the North African enclaves of Ceuta and Melilla.
Portugal does not recognize as Spanish the territory of Olivenza conquered by
Spain during the Napoleonic Wars. [http://www.elpais.com/articulo/espana/
eterna/disputa/Olivenza-Olivenca/elpepunac/20061204elpepinac_13/Tes] Some of
the most violent irredentist conflicts of recent times in Europe flared up as a
consequence of the break-up of the former Yugoslavia in the early 1990s. The
wars in Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina were largely about creating a new
political framework of states, each of which would be ethnically and
politically homogeneous. The conflict erupted further south with the ethnic
Albanian majority in Kosovo seeking to switch allegiance to the adjoining state
of Albania. Greece claims that the use of the name Republic of Macedonia by its
northern neighbor signifies an irredentist claim on the northern province of
Macedonia in Greece. South Asia too is another region in which armed
irredentist movements have been active for almost a century, due to the
Balkanization of North-East India, Burma and Bangladesh under British
colonialism. Most prominent amongst them are the Naga fight for Greater
Nagaland, the Chin struggle for a unified Chinland and other self-determinist
movements by the ethnic indigenous peoples of the erstwhile Assam both under
the British and post-British Assam under India. Irredentism is acute in the
Caucasus region, too. The Nagorno-Karabakh movement’s original slogan of
miatsum (‘union’) was explicitly oriented towards unification with Armenia,
feeding an Azerbaijani understanding of the conflict as a bilateral one between
itself and an irredentist Armenia. According to Prof. Thomas Ambrosio,
"Armenia's successful irredentist project in the Nagorno-Karabakh region of
Azerbaijan" and "From 1992 to the cease-fire in 1994, Armenia encountered a
highly permissive or tolerant international environment that allowed its
annexation of some 15 percent of Azerbaijani territory". In the view of Nadia
Milanova, Nagorno-Karabakh represents a combination of separatism and
irredentism. The Syrian Social Nationalist Party, which operates in Lebanon and
Syria, works for the unification of most modern states of the Levant and beyond
in a single state referred to as Greater Syria. The proposed Syrian country
includes Israel, Jordan, Iraq, Kuwait; and southern Turkey, northern Egypt, and
southwestern Iran. Japan claims the Russian-administered Kuril Islands, the
four southernmost isles of the island chain north of Hokkaido, annexed by the
Soviet Union following World War II. The 1909 Gando Convention addressed a
territory dispute between China and Joseon Korea in China's favor. Both Korean
states now accept the convention border as an administrative boundary. However,
because the convention was made by the occupying Empire of Japan, South Korea
has disputed its legality and some Koreans claim that Korea extends into "de
facto" PRC territory. The most ambitious claims include all parts of Manchuria
that the Goguryeo kingdom controlled. Both Korean states claim the Liancourt
Rocks, which Japan annexed while Korea was a Japanese protectorate. Irredentism
is commonplace in Africa due to the political boundaries of former European
colonial nation-states passing through tribal boundaries, and recent
declarations of independence after civil war. For example, some Ethiopian
nationalist circles still claim the former Ethiopian province of Eritrea
(internationally recognized as the independent State of Eritrea in 1993 after a
30 year civil war). Ogaden in eastern Ethiopia has seen a movement seeking to
make it part of Somalia. North American. Irredentism is also expressed by some
Chicano "nationalists" and Mexican-American activists in the Aztlán movement.
They call for the return of formerly Mexican-dominated lands in the
Southwestern United States to Mexico. These lands were annexed by the US in the
Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo and became the present-day states of California,
Texas, Nevada and Utah; and parts of Colorado, Arizona, and New Mexico. UK
issues. A unique situation exists with that of Berwick. Part of the citizenry
of the town support the transfer of Berwick to Scotland, although others would
prefer it to remain as part of the English county of Northumberland. However,
due to the nature of the political union between Scotland and England forming
the UK the reunification of Berwick goes largely unpursued. Various debates
have arisen surrounding the constitutional future of Berwick, or Berwick-upon-
Tweed as it is known in England, but have been largely academic. Irredentism
was also one of main reasons for the People's Republic of China to assume
sovereignty over Hong Kong. The territory had been leased by the British for 99
years. In 1997, when the lease ran out, the United Kingdom relenquished control
of Hong Kong. However, in the case of Hong Kong, irredentism was incidental as
the he New Territories part of the British colony were only on a lease expiring
in 1997 anyway and, with their surrender, it was thought the Crown territory of
Hong Kong itself would be nonviable as an entity independent of mainland China.
Of course, irredentism could be considered to have played a role in that the
People's Republic of China had no intention of renewing the lease on the New
Territories.
