Kosovo War The Kosovo War, was an armed conflict in Kosovo, in the Socialist
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, which involved Yugoslav government forces,
Albanian separatist forces (KLA), and NATO, between 1998 to 1999. The KLA,
formed in 1991, began attacking police stations and Yugoslav government offices
in February 1996, which resulted in an increase in the number of Yugoslav
security forces in the region. This led to an escalation into a conflict,
although it was initially viewed as an insurgency. The KLA was regarded by the
US as a terrorist group until 1998 when it was de-listed for classified
reasons. The UK and the US then lobbied France to do the same. The US and NATO
then cultivated diplomatic relationships with KLA leaders. In 1999, the KLA was
officially disbanded while some members joined the UCPMB in the Pre≈°evo
Valley, and the National Liberation Army (NLA) and Albanian National Army (ANA)
during the armed ethnic conflict in Macedonia. UNMIK instituted NGOs within
Kosovo such as the Kosovo Protection Corps (in accordance with UNSC resolution
1244 which required the establishment of a civilian emergency protection body
to replace the former KLA) and the Kosovo Police (which consisted mainly of KLA
veterans). NATO countries promoted the war in Kosovo as the first humanitarian
war based on short-term military reports and casualty reports. The conflict was
at the center of news headlines for months, and gained a massive amount of
coverage and attention from the international community and media. The NATO
bombing and surrounding events have remained controversial. Background. Kosovo
in Tito's Yugoslavia (1945‚Äì1986). Tensions between the Serbian and Albanian
communities in Kosovo simmered throughout the 20th century and occasionally
erupted into major violence, particularly during the First Balkan War, World
War I, and World War II. The Socialist government of Josip Broz Tito
systematically repressed nationalist manifestations throughout Yugoslavia,
seeking to ensure that no republic or nationality gained dominance over the
others. In particular, the power of Serbia‚Äîthe largest and most populous
republic‚Äîwas diluted by the establishment of autonomous governments in the
province of Vojvodina in the north of Serbia and Kosovo in the south. Kosovo's
borders did not precisely match the areas of ethnic Albanian settlement in
Yugoslavia (significant numbers of Albanians were left in the Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro, and Serbia though the majority of its inhabitants were
Albanian). Kosovo's formal autonomy, established under the 1945 Yugoslav
constitution, initially meant relatively little in practice. Tito's secret
police cracked down hard on nationalists. In 1956, a number of Albanians were
put on trial in Kosovo on charges of espionage and subversion. The threat of
separatism was in fact minimal, as the few underground groups aiming for union
with Albania were politically insignificant. Their long-term impact was
substantial, though, as some‚Äîparticularly the Revolutionary Movement for
Albanian Unity, founded by Adem Demaci‚Äîwere to form the political core of the
Kosovo Liberation Army. Demaci himself was imprisoned in 1964 along with many
of his followers. Yugoslavia underwent a period of economic and political
crisis in 1969, as a massive government program of economic reform widened the
gap between the rich north and poor south of the country. Student
demonstrations and riots in Belgrade in June 1968 spread to Kosovo in November
the same year, but were quelled by the Yugoslav security forces. However, some
of the students' demands‚Äîin particular, representative powers for Albanians
in both the Serbian and Yugoslav state bodies, and better recognition of the
Albanian language‚Äîwere conceded by Tito. The University of Pristina was
established as an independent institution in 1970, ending a long period when
the institution had been run as an outpost of Belgrade University. The
Albanianisation of education in Kosovo was hampered by the lack of Albanian-
language educational materials in Yugoslavia, so an agreement was struck with
Albania itself to supply textbooks. In 1974, Kosovo's political status was
improved further when a new Yugoslav constitution granted an expanded set of
political rights. Along with Vojvodina, Kosovo was declared a province and
gained many of the powers of a fully-fledged republic: a seat on the federal
presidency and its own assembly, police force, and national bank. Power was
still exercised by the Communist Party, but it was now devolved mainly to
ethnic Albanian communists. Tito's death on May 9, 1980 ushered in a long
period of political instability, worsened by growing economic crisis and
nationalist unrest. The first major outbreak occurred in Kosovo's main city,
Pristina, in July 1981, when Albanian students rioted over long queues in their
university canteen. This seemingly trivial dispute rapidly spread throughout
Kosovo and took on the character of a national revolt, with massive popular
demonstrations in many Kosovo towns. The protesters demanded that Kosovo should
become the seventh republic of Yugoslavia. However, this was politically
unacceptable to Serbia and the Socialist Republic of Macedonia. Some Serbs (and
possibly some Albanian nationalists as well) saw the demands as being a prelude
to a "Greater Albania" which could encompass parts of Montenegro, the Republic
of Macedonia and Kosovo itself. The Communist Yugoslav presidency quelled the
disturbances by sending in riot police and the army, and proclaiming a state of
emergency, although it did not repeal the province's autonomy as some Serbian
Communists demanded. The Yugoslav press reported that about 11 people had been
killed (others claimed a death toll as high as 1,000) and another 4,200 were
imprisoned. Kosovo's Communist Party also suffered purges, with several key
figures (including its president) expelled. Hardliners instituted a fierce
crackdown on nationalism of all kinds, Albanian and Serbian alike. Kosovo
endured a heavy secret police presence throughout most of the 1980s that
ruthlessly suppressed any unauthorized nationalist manifestations, both
Albanian and Serbian. According to a report quoted by Mark Thompson, as many as
580,000 inhabitants of Kosovo were arrested, interrogated, interned, or
reprimanded. Thousands of these lost their jobs or were expelled from their
educational establishments. During this time, tension between the Albanian and
Serbian communities continued to escalate. In 1969, the Serbian Orthodox Church
had ordered its clergy to compile data on the ongoing problems of Serbs in
Kosovo, seeking to pressure the government in Belgrade to do more to protect
the Serbian faithful. In February 1982, a group of priests from Serbia proper
petitioned their bishops to ask "why the Serbian Church is silent" and why it
did not campaign against "the destruction, arson and sacrilege of the holy
shrines of Kosovo". Such concerns did attract interest in Belgrade. Stories
appeared from time to time in the Belgrade media claiming that Serbs and
Montenegrins were being persecuted. There was a perception among Serbian
nationalists that Serbs were being driven out of Kosovo. In addition to all
this, the worsening state of Kosovo's economy made the province a poor choice
for Serbs seeking work. Albanians, as well as Serbs, tended to favor their
compatriots when employing new recruits, but the number of jobs was too few for
the population. Kosovo was the poorest part of Yugoslavia: the average per
capita income was $795, compared with the national average of $2,635. Riots. In
1981, it was reported that some 4,000 Serbs moved from Kosovo to Central Serbia
after the Kosovo Albanian riots in March that resulted in several Serb deaths
and the desecration of Serbian Orthodox architecture and graveyards. In 1982 It
was concluded that the Serbs were victims of major prejudice and harassment,
several murders had been committed by ethnic Albanians, and forming of serious
nationalist groups was reality. 33 nationalist formations were dismantled by
the Yugoslav Police who sentenced some 280 people (800 fined, 100 under
investigation) and seized arms caches and propaganda material. In 1987 David
Binder wrote a report on "The New York Times" about the rising nationalism
among Albanians in Kosovo. In his report he tells about Paraƒáin massacre,
where an ethnic Albanian soldier in the JNA killed four fellow soldiers and
wounded five others. The report quoting Federal Secretary for National Defense,
Fleet Adm. Branko Mamula, shows that from 1981‚Äì1987, 216 illegal Albanian
organizations with 1,435 members were discovered in the JNA. They had prepared
the mass killings of officers and soldiers, poisoning food and water, sabotage,
breaking in and stealing weapons and ammunition. Kosovo and the rise of
Slobodan Milo≈°eviƒá (1986‚Äì1990). In Kosovo, growing Albanian nationalism and
separatism led to tensions between Serbs and Albanians. An increasingly
poisonous atmosphere led to wild rumors being spread around and otherwise
trivial incidents being blown out of proportion. It was against this tense
background that the Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts (SANU, from its
Serbian initials, –°–ê–ù–£) conducted a survey of Serbs who had left Kosovo in
1985 and 1986. The report concluded that a considerable part of those who had
left had been under pressure by Albanians to do so. Sixteen prominent members
of the SANU began work in June 1985 on a draft document that was leaked to the
public in September 1986. The SANU Memorandum, as it has become known, was
hugely controversial. It focused on the political difficulties facing Serbs in
Yugoslavia, pointing to Tito's deliberate hobbling of Serbia's power and the
difficulties faced by Serbs outside Serbia proper. The Memorandum paid special
attention to Kosovo, arguing that the province's Serbs were being subjected to
"physical, political, legal and cultural genocide" in an "open and total war"
that had been ongoing since the spring of 1981. It claimed that Kosovo's status
in 1986 was a worse historical defeat for the Serbs than any event since
liberation from the Ottomans in 1804, thus ranking it above such catastrophes
as the Nazi occupation or the First World War occupation of Serbia by the
Austro-Hungarians. The Memorandum's authors claimed that 200,000 Serbs had
moved out of the province over the previous twenty years and warned that there
would soon be none left "unless things change radically." The remedy, according
to the Memorandum, was for "genuine security and unambiguous equality for all
peoples living in Kosovo and Metohija be established" and "objective and
permanent conditions for the return of the expelled nation [to be created." It
concluded that "Serbia must not be passive and wait and see what the others
will say, as it has done so often in the past." The SANU Memorandum met with
many different reactions. The Albanians saw it as a call for Serbian supremacy
at a local level. They claimed that all Serb emigrants had left Kosovo for
economic reasons. Other Yugoslav nationalities, notably the Slovenes and
Croats, saw a threat in the call for a more assertive Serbia. Serbs themselves
were divided: many welcomed it, while the Communist old guard strongly attacked
its message. One of those who denounced it was Serbian Communist Party official
Slobodan Milo≈°eviƒá. In November 1988, Kosovo's head of the provincial
committee was arrested. In March 1989, Milo≈°eviƒá announced an "anti-
bureaucratic revolution" in Kosovo and Vojvodina, curtailing their autonomy as
well as imposing a curfew and a state of emergency in Kosovo due to violent
demonstrations, resulting in 24 deaths (including two policemen). Milo≈°eviƒá
and his government claimed that the constitutional changes were necessary to
protect Kosovo's remaining Serbs against harassment from the Albanian majority.
Constitutional amendments (1989‚Äì1996). Events. On 17 November 1988, Kaqusha
Jashari and Azem Vllasi were forced to resign from the leadership of the League
of Communists of Kosovo (LCK). In early 1989 the Serbian Assembly proposed
amendments to the Constitution of Serbia which would remove the word
"Socialist" from the Serbian Republic's title, establish multi-party elections,
remove the independence of institutions of the autonomous provinces such as
Kosovo, and rename Kosovo as the Autonomous Province of Kosovo and Metohija. In
February Kosovar Albanians demonstrated in large numbers against the proposal,
emboldened by striking miners. Serbs in Belgrade protested against the Kosovo
Albanian's separatism. On 3 March 1989 the Presidency of Yugoslavia imposed
special measures assigning responsibility for public security to the federal
government. On 23 March the Assembly of Kosovo voted to accept the proposed
amendments although most Albanian delegates abstained. In early 1990 Kosovar
Albanians held mass demonstrations against the special measures, which were
lifted on 18 April 1990 and responsibility for public security was again
assigned to Serbia. On 8 May 1989 Milo≈°eviƒá became President of the
Presidency of Serbia, which was confirmed on 6 December. On 22 January 1990 the
14 congress of the League of Communists of Yugoslavia (LCY) abolished the
party's position as the only legal political party in Yugoslavia. In January
1990 the Yugoslav government announced it would press ahead with the creation
of a multi-party system. On 26 June 1990 Serbian authorities closed the Kosovo
Assembly citing special circumstances. On 1 or 2 July 1990 Serbia approved the
new amendments to the Constitution of Serbia in a referendum. Also on 2 July,
114 ethnic Albanian delegates of the 180 member Kosovo Assembly declared Kosovo
an independent republic within Yugoslavia. On 5 July the Serbian Assembly
dissolved the Kosovo Assembly. Serbia also dissolved the provincial executive
council and assumed full and direct control of the province. Serbia took over
management of Kosovo's principal Albanian-language media, halting Albanian-
language broadcasts. On 4 September 1990 Kosovar Albanians observed a 24-hour
general strike, virtually shutting down the province. On 16 or 17 July 1990,
the League of Communists of Serbia (LCS) combined with the Socialist Alliance
of Working People of Serbia to become the Socialist Party of Serbia (SPS), and
Milo≈°eviƒá became its first president. On 8 August 1990 several amendments to
the federal Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (SFRY) Constitution were
adopted enabling the establishment of a multi-party election system. On 7
September 1990 the Constitution of the Republic of Kosovo was promulgated by
the disbanded Assembly of Kosovo. Milo≈°eviƒá responded by ordering the arrest
of the deputies of the disbanded Assembly of Kosovo. The new controversial
Serbian Constitution was promulgated on 28 September 1990. Multi-party
elections were held in Serbia on 9 and 26 December 1990 after which Milo≈°eviƒá
became President of Serbia. In September 1991 Kosovar Albanians held an
unofficial referendum in which they voted overwhelmingly for independence. On
24 May 1992 Kosovar Albanians held unofficial elections for an assembly and
president of the Republic of Kosovo. On 5 August 1991 the Serbian Assembly
suspended the Pri≈°tina daily "Rilindja", following the Law on Public
Information of 29 March 1991 and establishment of the "Panorama" publishing
house on 6 November which incorporated "Rilindja", which was declared
unconstitutional by the federal authorities. United Nations Special Rapporteur
Tadeusz Mazowiecki reported on 26 February 1993 that the police had intensified
their repression of the Albanian population since 1990, including depriving
them of their basic rights, destroying their educations system, and large
numbers of political dismissals of civil servants. Analysis. Crucially, as both
provinces had a vote in the eight member Yugoslav Presidency, this gave
Milosevic an automatic four votes when combined with Serbia and Montenegro
(which was closely allied to Serbia). Slovenia, Croatia, Bosnia and Macedonia
thus had to maintain an uneasy alliance to prevent Milo≈°eviƒá from driving
through constitutional changes. Serbia's political changes were ratified in a
July 5, 1990 referendum across the entire republic of Serbia, including Kosovo.
As a result of these measures more than 80,000 Kosovo Albanians were expelled
from their state jobs in Kosovo. A new Serb curriculum was imposed in all
higher education in Kosovo, a move which was rejected by Albanians who
responded by creating their parallel education system. The impact on Kosovo was
drastic. The reduction of its autonomy was accompanied by the abolition of its
political institutions (including the League of Communists of Kosovo); its
assembly and government were formally disbanded. As most of Kosovo's industry
was state-owned, the changes brought a wholesale change of corporate cadres.
Technically, few were sacked outright: their companies required them to sign
loyalty pledges, which most Albanians would not sign, although a few did and
remained employed in Serbian state companies right up to 1999. Albanian
cultural autonomy was also drastically reduced. TV and radio broadcasts in
Albanian ceased. Albanian was no longer an official language of the province.
The University of Pristina, seen as a hotbed of Albanian nationalism, was
purged: 800 lecturers at Pristina University were sacked and 22,500 of the
23,000 students expelled. Some 40,000 Yugoslav troops and police replaced the
original Albanian-run security forces. A punitive regime was imposed that was
harshly condemned as a "police state". Poverty and unemployment reached
catastrophic levels, with about 80% of Kosovo's population becoming unemployed.
As many as a third of adult male Albanians chose to go abroad (particularly to
Germany and Switzerland) to find work. With Kosovo's Communist Party
effectively broken up by Milo≈°eviƒá's crackdown, the dominant Albanian
political party position passed to the Democratic League of Kosovo, led by the
writer Ibrahim Rugova. It responded to the abolition of Kosovo's autonomy by
pursuing a policy of peaceful resistance. Rugova took the very practical line
that armed resistance would be futile given Serbia's military strength and
would lead only to a bloodbath in the province. He called on the Albanian
populace to boycott the Yugoslav and Serbian states by not participating in any
elections, by ignoring the military draft (compulsory in Yugoslavia), and most
important, by not paying any taxes or duties to the State. He also called for
the creation of parallel Albanian schools, clinics, and hospitals. In September
1991, the shadow Kosovo Assembly organized a referendum on independence for
Kosovo. Despite widespread harassment and violence by Serbian security forces,
the referendum achieved a reported 90% turnout among the province's Albanians,
and a 98% vote‚Äînearly a million votes in all‚Äîwhich approved the creation of
an independent "Republic of Kosovo". In May 1992, a second referendum elected
Rugova as President of Kosovo. The Serbian government declared that both
referendums were illegal, and their results null and void. Eruption of War. The
slide to war (1996‚Äì1998). Rugova's policy of passive resistance succeeded in
keeping Kosovo quiet during the war with Slovenia, and the wars in Croatia and
Bosnia during the early 1990s. However, as evidenced by the emergence of the
KLA, this came at the cost of increasing frustration among Kosovo's Albanian
population. In the mid-1990s, Rugova pleaded for a United Nations peacekeeping
force for Kosovo. In 1997, Milo≈°eviƒá was promoted to the presidency of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (comprising Serbia and Montenegro since its
inception in April 1992). Continuing Serbian repression had radicalized many
Albanians, some of whom decided that only armed resistance would change the
situation. On April 22, 1996, four attacks on Serbian security personnel were
carried out almost simultaneously in several parts of Kosovo. A hitherto-
unknown terrorist organization calling itself the "Kosovo Liberation Army"
(KLA) subsequently claimed responsibility. The nature of the KLA was at first
highly mysterious. It is widely believed that the KLA received financial and
material support from the Kosovo Albanian diaspora. In early 1997, Albania
collapsed into chaos following the fall of President Sali Berisha. Military
stockpiles were looted with impunity by criminal gangs, with much of the
hardware ending up in western Kosovo and boosting the growing KLA arsenal.
Bujar Bukoshi, shadow Prime Minister in exile (in Z√ºrich, Switzerland),
created a group called FARK (Armed Forces of the Republic of Kosova) which was
reported to have been disbanded and absorbed by the KLA in 1998. The Yugoslav
government considered the KLA to be "terrorists" and "insurgents" who
indiscriminately attacked police and civilians, while most Albanians saw the
KLA as "freedom fighters". In 1998, the U.S. State Department listed the KLA as
a terrorist organization, and in 1999 the Republican Policy Committee of the
U.S. Senate expressed its troubles with the "effective alliance" of the
Democratic Clinton administration with the KLA due to "numerous reports from
reputable unofficial sources ". In 2000, a BBC article stated that "Nato at
War" shows how the United States, which had described the KLA as "terrorist",
now sought to form a relationship with the group. U.S. envoy Robert Gelbard
referred to the KLA as terrorists. Responding to criticism, he later clarified
to the House Committee on International Relations that "while it has committed
'terrorist acts,' it has 'not been classified legally by the U.S. Government as
a terrorist organization.'" On June 1998, he held talks with two men who
claimed they were political leaders. Meanwhile, the U.S. held an "outer wall of
sanctions" on Yugoslavia which had been tied to a series of issues, Kosovo
being one of them. These were maintained despite the agreement at Dayton to end
all sanctions. The Clinton administration claimed that Dayton bound Yugoslavia
to hold discussions with Rugova over Kosovo. The crisis escalated in December
1997 at the Peace Implementation Council meeting in Bonn, where the
International Community (as defined in the Dayton Agreement) agreed to give the
High Representative in Bosnia sweeping powers, including the right to dismiss
elected leaders. At the same time, Western diplomats insisted that Kosovo be
discussed, and that Serbia and Yugoslavia be responsive to Albanian demands
there. The delegation from Serbia stormed out of the meetings in protest. This
was followed by the return of the Contact Group that oversaw the last phases of
the Bosnian conflict and declarations from European powers demanding that
Serbia solve the problem in Kosovo. War begins. KLA attacks suddenly
intensified, centered on the Drenica valley area, with the compound of one Adem
Jashari being a particular focal point. Days after Robert Gelbard described the
KLA as a terrorist group, Serbian police responded to the KLA attacks in the
Likosane area, and pursued some of the KLA to Cirez, resulting in the deaths of
16 Albanian fighters and four Serbian policemen. The first serious action of
the war had begun. Despite some accusations of summary executions and killings
of civilians, condemnations from Western capitals were not as voluble as they
would become later. Serb police began to pursue Jashari and his followers in
the village of Donje Prekaz. A massive firefight at the Jashari compound led to
the massacre of 60 Albanians, of which eighteen were women and ten were under
the age of sixteen. This March 5 event provoked massive condemnation from the
western capitals. Madeleine Albright stated that "this crisis is not an
internal affair of the FRY". On March 24, Serbian forces surrounded the village
of Glodjane, in the Dukagjin operational zone, and attacked a rebel compound
there. Despite their superior firepower, the Serbian forces failed to destroy
the KLA unit which had been their objective. Although there were deaths and
severe injuries on the Albanian side, the insurgency in Glodjane was far from
stamped out. It was in fact to become one of the strongest centers of
resistance in the upcoming war. The KLA's first goal was thus to merge its
Drenica stronghold with their stronghold in Albania proper, and this would
shape the first few months of the fighting. The Serbs also continued their
efforts at diplomacy, attempting to arrange talks with Ibrahim Rugova's staff
(talks which Rugova and his staff refused to attend). After several failed
meetings, Ratko Markoviƒá, chairman of the Serbian delegation to the meetings,
invited representatives of Kosovo minority groups to attend while maintaining
his invitation to the Albanians. Serbian President Milan Milutinoviƒá attended
one of the meetings, though Rugova did not. He and his staff insisted on
talking to Yugoslav officials, not "Serbian" ones, and only to discuss the
modalities of Kosovo independence. A new Serbian government was also formed at
this time, led by the Socialist Party of Serbia and the Serbian Radical Party.
Ultra-nationalist Radical Party chairman Vojislav ≈ e≈°elj became a deputy
prime minister. This increased the dissatisfaction with Serbia's position among
Western diplomats and spokespersons. In early April, Serbia arranged for a
referendum on the issue of foreign interference in Kosovo. Serbian voters
decisively rejected foreign interference in this crisis. Meanwhile, the KLA
claimed much of the area in and around Deƒçani and ran a territory based in the
village of Gloƒëane, encompassing its surroundings. So, on May 31, 1998, the
Yugoslav army and the Serb Ministry of the Interior police began an operation
to clear the border of the KLA. NATO's response to this offensive was mid-
June's Operation Determined Falcon, an air show over the Yugoslav borders.
During this time, the Yugoslav President Milo≈°eviƒá reached an arrangement
with Boris Yeltsin of Russia to stop offensive operations and prepare for talks
with the Albanians, who, through this whole crisis, refused to talk to the
Serbian side, but not the Yugoslav. In fact, the only meeting between
Milo≈°eviƒá and Ibrahim Rugova took place on May 15 in Belgrade, two days after
Richard Holbrooke announced that it would take place. One month later,
Holbrooke, after a trip to Belgrade where he threatened Milo≈°eviƒá that if he
did not obey, "what's left of your country will implode", he visited the border
areas affected by the fighting in early June; there he was famously
photographed with the KLA. The publication of these images sent a signal to the
KLA, its supporters and sympathizers, and to observers in general, that the
U.S. was decisively backing the KLA and the Albanian population in Kosovo. The
Yeltsin agreement included Milo≈°eviƒá's allowing international representatives
to set up a mission in Kosovo-Metohija to monitor the situation there. This was
the Kosovo Diplomatic Observer Mission (KDOM) that began operations in early
July. The American government welcomed this part of the agreement, but
denounced the initiative's call for a mutual cease fire. Rather, the Americans
demanded that the Serbian-Yugoslavian side should cease fire "without
linkage...to a cessation in terrorist activities". All through June and into
mid-July, the KLA maintained its advance. KLA surrounded Peƒá, ƒêakovica, and
had set up an interim capital in the town of Mali≈°evo (north of Orahovac). The
KLA troops infiltrated Suva Reka, and the northwest of Pri≈°tina. They moved on
to the Belacevec coal pits and captured them in late June, threatening energy
supplies in the region. Their tactics as usual focused mainly on guerilla and
mountain warfare, and harassing and ambushing Serb forces and police patrols.
The tide turned in mid-July when the KLA captured Orahovac. On July 17, 1998,
two close-by villages to Orahovac, Retimlije and Opteru≈°a, were also captured.
Similar, even if less systematic events took place in the town of Orahovac and
the larger Serb village of Velika hoƒãa. The Orthodox monastery of Zociste 3
miles (5¬ km) from Orehovac‚Äîfamous for the relics of the Saints Kosmas and
Damianos and revered also by local Albanians‚Äîwas robbed, its monks deported
to a KLA prison camp, and, while empty, the monastery church and all its
buildings were leveled to the ground by mining. This led to a series of Serb
and Yugoslav offensives which would continue into the beginning of August. A
new set of KLA attacks in mid-August triggered Yugoslavian operations in south-
central Kosovo south of the Pri≈°tina-Peƒá road. This wound down with the
capture of Klecka on August 23 and the discovery of a KLA-run crematorium in
which some of their victims were found. The KLA began an offensive on September
1 around Prizren, causing Yugoslavian military activity there. In Metohija,
around Peƒá, another offensive caused condemnation as international officials
expressed fear that a large column of displaced people would be attacked. In
early mid-September, for the first time, some KLA activity was reported in
northern Kosovo around Podujevo. Finally, in late September, a determined
effort was made to clear the KLA out of the northern and central parts of
Kosovo and out of the Drenica valley itself. During this time many threats were
made from Western capitals but these were tempered somewhat by the elections in
Bosnia, as they did not want Serbian Democrats and Radicals to win. Following
the elections, however, the threats intensified once again but a galvanizing
event was needed. They got it on September 28, when the mutilated corpses of a
family were discovered by KDOM outside the village of Gornje Obrinje; the
bloody doll from there became the rallying image for the ensuing war. UN, NATO,
and OSCE (1998‚Äì1999). On 23 September 1998 acting under Chapter VII of the
United Nations Charter the UN Security Council adopted Resolution 1199. This
expressed 'grave concern' at reports reaching the Secretary General that over
230,000 persons had been displaced from their homes by 'the excessive and
indiscriminate use of force by Serbian security forces and the Yugoslav Army',
demanding that all parties in Kosovo and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
(Serbia and Montenegro) cease hostilities and maintain a ceasefire. On 24
September the North Atlantic Council (NAC) of NATO issued an "activation
warning" (ACTWARN) taking NATO to an increased level of military preparedness
for both a limited air option and a phased air campaign in Kosovo. The other
major issue for those who saw no option but to resort to the use of force was
the estimated 250,000 displaced Albanians, 30,000 of whom were out in the
woods, without warm clothing or shelter, with winter fast approaching.
Meanwhile, the U.S. Ambassador to the Republic of Macedonia, Christopher Hill,
was leading shuttle diplomacy between an Albanian delegation, led by Rugova,
and the Yugoslav and Serbian authorities. It was these meetings which were
shaping what was to be the peace plan to be discussed during a period of
planned NATO occupation of Kosovo. During a period of two weeks, threats
intensified, culminating in NATO's Activation Order being given. All was ready
for the bombs to fly; Richard Holbrooke went to Belgrade in the hope of
reaching an agreement with Milo≈°eviƒá. Officially, the international community
demanded an end to fighting. It specifically demanded that the Serbs end its
offensives against the KLA whilst attempting to convince the KLA to drop its
bid for independence. Moreover, attempts were made to persuade Milo≈°eviƒá to
permit NATO peacekeeping troops to enter Kosovo. This, they argued, would allow
for the Christopher Hill peace process to proceed and yield a peace agreement.
On 13 October 1998 the North Atlantic Council issued issue activation orders
(ACTORDs) for the execution of both limited air strikes and a phased air
campaign in Yugoslavia which would begin in approximately 96 hours. On 15
October the NATO Kosovo Verification Mission (KVM) Agreement for a ceasefire
was signed, and the deadline for withdrawal was extended to 27 October. The
Serbian withdrawal commenced on or around 25 October 1998, and Operation Eagle
Eye commenced on 30 October. The KVM was a large contingent of unarmed
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) peace monitors
(officially known as verifiers) that moved into Kosovo. Their inadequacy was
evident from the start. They were nicknamed the "clockwork oranges" in
reference to their brightly coloured vehicles. Fighting resumed in December
1998 after both sides broke the ceasefire. The January to March 1999 phase of
the war brought increasing insecurity in urban areas, including bombings and
murders. Such attacks took place during the Rambouillet talks in February and
as the Kosovo Verification Agreement unraveled in March. Killings on the roads
continued and increased. There were military confrontations in, among other
places, the Vuƒçitrn area in February and the heretofore unaffected Kaƒçanik
area in early March. On 15 January 1999 the Raƒçak massacre occurred when "45
Kosovan Albanian farmers were rounded up, led up a hill and massacred". The
bodies had been discovered by OSCE monitors, including Head of Mission William
Walker, and foreign news correspondents. Yugoslavia denied a massacre took
place. The Raƒçak massacre was the culmination of the KLA attacks and Serbian
reprisals that had continued throughout the winter of 1998‚Äì1999. The incident
was immediately condemned as a massacre by the Western countries and the United
Nations Security Council, and later became the basis of one of the charges of
war crimes leveled against Milo≈°eviƒá and his top officials. This massacre was
the turning point of the war. NATO decided that the conflict could only be
settled by introducing a military peacekeeping force under the auspices of
NATO, to forcibly restrain the two sides. Pri≈°tina, the capital of Kosovo, had
been subjected to heavy firefights and segregation according to OSCE reports.
The Rambouillet Conference (January‚ÄìMarch 1999). On 30 January 1999 NATO
issued a statement announcing that the North Atlantic Council had agreed that
"the NATO Secretary General may authorise air strikes against targets on FRY
territory" to "compliance with the demands of the international community and
[to achieve a political settlement". While this was most obviously a threat to
the Milo≈°eviƒá government, it also included a coded threat to the Albanians:
any decision would depend on the "position and actions of the Kosovo Albanian
leadership and all Kosovo Albanian armed elements in and around Kosovo." Also
on 30 January 1999 the Contact Group issued a set of "non-negotiable
principles" which made up a package known as "Status Quo Plus"‚Äîeffectively
the restoration of Kosovo's pre-1990 autonomy within Serbia, plus the
introduction of democracy and supervision by international organizations. It
also called for a peace conference to be held in February 1999 at the Ch√¢teau
de Rambouillet, outside Paris. The Rambouillet talks began on February 6, 1999,
with NATO Secretary General Javier Solana negotiating with both sides. They
were intended to conclude by February 19. The Serbian delegation was led by
then president of Serbia Milan Milutinoviƒá, while Milo≈°eviƒá himself remained
in Belgrade. This was in contrast to the 1995 Dayton conference that ended the
war in Bosnia, where Milo≈°eviƒá negotiated in person. The absence of
Milo≈°eviƒá was interpreted as a sign that the real decisions were being made
back in Belgrade, a move that aroused criticism in Serbia as well as abroad;
Kosovo's Serbian Orthodox bishop Artemije traveled all the way to Rambouillet
to protest that the delegation was wholly unrepresentative. At this time
speculation about an indictment of Milo≈°eviƒá for war crimes was rife, so his
absence may have been motivated by fear of arrest. The first phase of
negotiations was successful. In particular, a statement was issued by the
Contact Group co-chairmen on February 23, 1999 that the negotiations "have led
to a "consensus" on substantial autonomy for Kosovo, including on mechanisms
for free and fair elections to democratic institutions, for the governance of
Kosovo, for the protection of human rights and the rights of members of
national communities; and for the establishment of a fair judicial system".
They went on to say that "a political framework is now in place", leaving the
further work of finalizing "the implementation Chapters of the Agreement,
including the modalities of the "invited international" civilian and military
presence in Kosovo". During the next month, however, NATO, under the influence
of US diplomats Rubin and Albright, sought to impose a forced, as opposed to
invited, military presence. The tilting of NATO towards the KLA organization is
chronicled in the BBC Television "Moral Combat: NATO at War" program. This
happened despite the fact, quoting General Klaus Naumann (Chairman of NATO
Military Committee), that "Ambassador Walker stated in the NAC (North Atlantic
Council) that the majority of violations was caused by the KLA". In the end, on
March 18, 1999, the Albanian, American, and British delegations signed what
became known as the Rambouillet Accords while the Serbian and Russian
delegations refused as it called for the complete and unrestricted movement of
NATO on the whole of Serbia's territory. The accords called for NATO
administration of Kosovo as an autonomous province within Yugoslavia, a force
of 30,000 NATO troops to maintain order in Kosovo; an unhindered right of
passage for NATO troops on Yugoslav territory, including Kosovo; and immunity
for NATO and its agents to Yugoslav law. These latter provisions were much the
same as had been applied to Bosnia for the SFOR (Stabilization Force) mission
there. There were also many who viewed the accords as an excuse to bomb the
whole of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. While the accords did not fully
satisfy the Albanians, they were much too radical for the Serbs, who responded
by substituting a drastically revised text that even the Russians (traditional
allies of the Serbs) found unacceptable. It sought to reopen the painstakingly
negotiated political status of Kosovo and deleted all of the proposed
implementation measures. Among many other changes in the proposed new version,
it eliminated the entire chapter on humanitarian assistance and reconstruction,
removed virtually all international oversight and dropped any mention of
invoking "the will of the people Kosovo" in determining the final status of the
province. Two proposals were on the table on the eve of the bombing. One was
the Rambouillet accord, presented to Serbia as an ultimatum. The second was
Serbia‚Äôs position, formulated in its March 15 ‚ÄúRevised Draft Agreement‚Äù
and the Serb National Assembly Resolution of March 23. A serious concern for
protecting Kosovars might well have brought into consideration other options as
well, including, perhaps, something like the 1992‚Äì93 proposal of the Serbian
president of Yugoslavia, Dobrica Cosic, that Kosovo be partitioned, separating
itself from Serbia apart from ‚Äúa number of Serbian enclaves.‚Äù At the time,
the proposal was rejected by Ibrahim Rugova‚Äôs Republic of Kosovo, which had
declared independence and set up a parallel government; but it might have
served as a basis for negotiation in the different circumstances of early 1999.
Events proceeded rapidly after the failure at Rambouillet and the alternative
Serbian proposal. The international monitors from the OSCE withdrew on 22
March, for fear of the monitors' safety ahead of the anticipated NATO bombing
campaign. On March 23, the Serbian assembly accepted the principle of autonomy
for Kosovo and non-military part of the agreement. But the Serbian side had
objections to the military part of the Rambouillet agreement, particularly
appendix B that foresees free access to all of Serbia for NATO troops, which it
characterized as "NATO occupation". Perhaps even more striking is that the
Rambouillet ultimatum, though universally described as the peace proposal, was
also kept from the public, particularly the provisions that were apparently
introduced in the final moments of the Paris peace talks (appendix B) in March
after Serbia had expressed agreement with the main political proposals, and
that virtually guaranteed rejection. NATO bombing timeline. On 23 March 1999 at
21:30 UTC Richard Holbrooke returned to Brussels and announced that peace talks
had failed and formally handed the matter to NATO for military action. Hours
before the announcement, Yugoslavia announced on national television it had
declared a state of emergency citing an imminent threat of war and began a huge
mobilization of troops and resources. On 23 March 1999 at 22:17 UTC the
Secretary General of NATO, Javier Solana, announced he had directed the Supreme
Allied Commander Europe (SACEUR), US Army General Wesley Clark, to "initiate
air operations in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia." On 24 March at 19:00 UTC
NATO started its bombing campaign against Yugoslavia. NATO's bombing campaign
lasted from March 24 to June 11, 1999, involving up to 1,000 aircraft operating
mainly from bases in Italy and aircraft carriers stationed in the Adriatic.
Tomahawk cruise missiles were also extensively used, fired from aircraft,
ships, and submarines. All of the NATO members were involved to some
degree‚Äîwith the exception of Greece. Over the ten weeks of the conflict, NATO
aircraft flew over 38,000 combat missions. For the German Air Force
("Luftwaffe"), it was the second time it had participated in a conflict since
World War II after the Bosnian War. The proclaimed goal of the NATO operation
was summed up by its spokesman as "Serbs out, peacekeepers in, refugees back".
That is, Yugoslav troops would have to leave Kosovo and be replaced by
international peacekeepers to ensure that the Albanian refugees could return to
their homes. The campaign was initially designed to destroy Yugoslav air
defenses and high-value military targets. It did not go very well at first,
with bad weather hindering many sorties early on. NATO had seriously
underestimated Milo≈°eviƒá's will to resist: few in Brussels thought that the
campaign would last more than a few days, and although the initial bombardment
was more than just a pin-prick, it was nowhere near the concentrated
bombardments seen in Baghdad in 1991. On the ground, the ethnic cleansing
campaign by the Serbians was stepped up. In actions unparalleled since World
War Two, Serbian forces expelled hundreds of thousands of Kosovo Albanians from
Kosovo, in miserable conditions. UNHCR representatives reported on 3 April
that, "During 2 April, an estimated 45,000 Kosovars arrived at the Macedonian
border with Kosovo, of whom around 25,000 in six trains carrying people who
report that they were expelled from Pristina. The new arrivals were exhausted
and traumatized.". On 6 April, UNHCR representatives were reporting that "at
least 25,000 Kosovars arrived at the main Albanian border point at Morini
between Monday and Tuesday mornings and a further 15,000 at the mountain
frontier of Qafa Prushit, bringing the estimated total to 262,000 ... Virtually
every Kosovar arriving at Qafa Prushit came on foot in very, very bad physical
condition ... refugees interviewed said men were both being tortured and even
executed in front of their families ... Serbian police stationed just opposite
the Albanian border post warned journalists they would shoot if the
correspondents approached. Aid officials were told to withdraw 500 metres from
the crossing.". A report written for the UNHCR after the crisis concluded that
'half a million people arrived in neighbouring areas in the course of about two
weeks, and a few weeks later the total was over 850,000'. The Serbian
authorities have never acknowledged these UNHCR figures. On 25 March Arkan
appeared at the Hyatt hotel in Belgrade where most of Western journalists were
staying and warned all of them to leave Serbia. NATO military operations
switched increasingly to attacking Yugoslav units on the ground, hitting
targets as small as individual tanks and artillery pieces, as well as
continuing with the strategic bombardment. This activity was, however, heavily
constrained by politics, as each target needed to be approved by all nineteen
member states. Montenegro was bombed on several occasions but NATO eventually
desisted to prop up the precarious position of its anti-Milo≈°eviƒá leader,
ƒêukanoviƒá. So-called "dual-use" targets, of use to both civilians and the
military, were attacked, including bridges across the Danube, factories, power
stations, schools, houses, nurseries, hospitals, telecommunications facilities
and, controversially, the headquarters of Yugoslavian Leftists, a political
party led by Milo≈°eviƒá's wife, and the Serbian state television broadcasting
tower. Some saw these actions as violations of international law and the Geneva
Conventions in particular. NATO, however, argued that these facilities were
potentially useful to the Yugoslav military and that their bombing was
therefore justified. At the start of May, a NATO aircraft attacked an Albanian
refugee convoy, believing it was a Yugoslav military convoy, killing around
fifty people. NATO admitted its mistake five days later, but the Serbs accused
NATO of deliberately attacking the refugees; however, a later report conducted
by the ICTY entitled Final Report to the Prosecutor by the Committee
Established to Review the NATO Bombing Campaign Against the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia opined that "civilians were not deliberately attacked in this
incident" and that "neither the aircrew nor their commanders displayed the
degree of recklessness in failing to take precautionary measures which would
sustain criminal charges." On May 7, NATO bombs hit the Chinese Embassy in
Belgrade, killing three Chinese journalists and outraging Chinese public
opinion. The United States and NATO later apologized for the bombing, saying
that it occurred because of an outdated map provided by the CIA although this
was challenged by a joint report from "The Observer" (UK) and "Politiken"
(Denmark) newspapers which claimed that NATO intentionally bombed the embassy
because it was being used as a relay station for Yugoslav army radio signals.
However the report by the newspaper contradicts findings in the same report by
the ICTY which stated that the root of the failures in target location "appears
to stem from the land navigation techniques employed by an intelligence
officer." In another major incident at the Dubrava prison in Kosovo, the
Yugoslav government attributed 85 civilian deaths to NATO bombing of the
facility after NATO cited Serbian and Yugoslav military activity in the area
although a Human Rights Watch reported only at least nineteen ethnic Albanian
prisoners killed. By the start of April, the conflict seemed little closer to a
resolution and NATO countries began to think seriously about a ground
operation‚Äîan invasion of Kosovo. This would have to be organized very
quickly, as there was little time before winter would set in and much work
would have to be done to improve the roads from the Greek and Albanian ports to
the envisaged invasion routes through Macedonia and northeastern Albania.
British Prime Minister Tony Blair was a strong advocate of ground forces,
pressing for this from the United States; his strong stance caused some alarm
in Washington as American forces would be making the largest contribution to
any offensive. U.S. President Bill Clinton was extremely reluctant to commit
American forces for a ground offensive. Instead, Clinton authorized a CIA
operation to look into methods to destabilize the Serbian government without
training KLA troops. At the same time, Finnish and Russian diplomatic
negotiators continued to try to persuade Milo≈°eviƒá to back down. Tony Blair
would order 50,000 British soldiers to be made ready for a ground offensive:
most of the available British Army. Milo≈°eviƒá finally recognised that NATO
was serious in its resolve to end the conflict one way or another and that
Russia would not intervene to defend Serbia despite Moscow's strong anti-NATO
rhetoric. Faced with little alternative, Milo≈°eviƒá accepted the conditions
offered by a Finnish‚ÄìRussian mediation team and agreed to a military presence
within Kosovo headed by the UN, but incorporating NATO troops. The Norwegian
special forces H√¶rens Jegerkommando and Forsvarets Spesialkommando cooperated
with the KLA in gathering intelligence information. Preparing for the invasion
on June 12, the Norwegian special forces sat together with the KLA on the Ramno
mountain on the border between Macedonia and Kosovo and had an excellent
scouting point for what was happening inside Kosovo. Together with British
special forces, Norwegian special forces were the first to cross over the
border into Kosovo. According to Keith Graves with the television network Sky
News, the Norwegians were already inside Kosovo two days prior to the marching
in of other forces and were among the first to enter into Pristina. The H√¶rens
Jegerkommando's and Forsvarets Spesialkommando's job was to clear the way
between the striding parties and to make local deals to implement the peace
deal between the Serbians and the Kosovo Albanians. Yugoslav army withdrawal
and the entry of KFOR. On 3 June 1999, Milo≈°eviƒá accepted the terms of an
international peace plan to end the fighting, with the Serbian parliament
adopting the proposal amid contentious debate with delegates coming close to
fistfights at some points. On 10 June, the North Atlantic Council ratified the
agreement and suspended air operations. On 12 June, after Milo≈°eviƒá accepted
the conditions, the NATO-led peacekeeping Kosovo Force (KFOR) began entering
Kosovo. KFOR had been preparing to conduct combat operations, but in the end,
its mission was only peacekeeping. It was based upon the Allied Rapid Reaction
Corps headquarters commanded by then Lieutenant General Mike Jackson of the
British Army. It consisted of British forces (a brigade built from 4th Armored
and 5th Airborne Brigades), a French Army Brigade, a German Army brigade, which
entered from the west while all the other forces advanced from the south, and
Italian Army and United States Army brigades. The U.S. contribution, known as
the Initial Entry Force, was led by the 1st Armored Division which was
spearheaded by a platoon from the 2nd Battalion, 505th Parachute Infantry
Regiment attached to the British Forces. Subordinate units included TF 1‚Äì35
Armor from Baumholder, Germany, the 2nd Battalion, 505th Parachute Infantry
Regiment from Fort Bragg, North Carolina, the 26th Marine Expeditionary Unit
from Camp Lejeune, North Carolina, the 1st Battalion, 26th Infantry Regiment
from Schweinfurt, Germany, and Echo Troop, 4th Cavalry Regiment, also from
Schweinfurt, Germany. Also attached to the U.S. force was the Greek Army's
501st Mechanized Infantry Battalion. The initial U.S. forces established their
area of operation around the towns of Uro≈°evac, the future Camp Bondsteel, and
Gnjilane, at Camp Monteith, and spent four months‚Äîthe start of a stay which
continues to date‚Äîestablishing order in the southeast sector of Kosovo.
During the initial incursion, the U.S. soldiers were greeted by Albanians
cheering and throwing flowers as U.S. soldiers and KFOR rolled through their
villages. Although no resistance was met, three U.S. soldiers from the Initial
Entry Force lost their lives in accidents. On 1 October 1999, approximately 150
paratroopers from Alpha Company, 1/508th Airborne Battalion Combat Team from
Vicenza, Italy parachuted into Ferizaj, Kosovo as part of Operation Rapid
Guardian. The purpose of the mission was primarily to warn then Serbian
President Slobodan Milo≈°eviƒá of NATO resolve and of its rapid military
capability. One U.S. soldier, Army Ranger Sgt. Jason Neil Pringle, was killed
during operations after his parachute failed to deploy. The paratroopers of the
1/508th then joined paratroopers of the 82nd Airborne and K.F.O.R. in
patrolling various areas of Kosovo, without incident, through 3 October 1999.
Following the military campaign, the involvement of Russian peacekeepers proved
to be tense and challenging to the NATO Kosovo force. The Russians expected to
have an independent sector of Kosovo, only to be unhappily surprised with the
prospect of operating under NATO command. Without prior communication or
coordination with NATO, Russian peacekeeping forces entered Kosovo from Bosnia
and seized Pristina International Airport. In 2010, James Blunt described in an
interview how his unit was given the assignment of securing Pristina during the
advance of the 30,000-strong peacekeeping force and how the Russian army had
moved in and taken control of the city's airport before his unit's arrival. As
the first officer on the scene, Blunt shared a part in the difficult task of
addressing the potentially violent international incident. According to Blunt's
account, verified by General Mike Jackson, there was a stand-off with the
Russians, and the NATO Supreme Commander, US General Wesley Clark, gave orders
to over-power them. Whilst these were questioned by Blunt, they were rejected
by General Jackson, with the now famous line, "I'm not having my soldiers
responsible for starting World War III." Furthermore, in June 2000, arms
trading relations between Russia and Serbia were exposed which lead to the
retaliation and bombings of Russian Checkpoints and area Police Stations.
Outpost Gunner was established on a high point in the Pre≈°evo Valley by Echo
Battery 1/161 Field Artillery in an attempt to monitor and assist with
peacekeeping efforts in the Russian Sector. Operating under the support of 2/
3 Field Artillery, 1st Armored Division, the Battery was able to successfully
deploy and continuously operate a Firefinder Radar which allowed the NATO
forces to keep a closer watch on activities in the Sector and the Pre≈°evo
Valley. Eventually a deal was struck whereby Russian forces operated as a unit
of KFOR but not under the NATO command structure. Reaction to the war. Support
for the war. Support for the Kosovan War and, in particular, the legitimacy of
NATO's bombing campaign came from a variety of sources. Every member of NATO,
every EU country, and all of Serbia's neighbours, supported military action
with statements from the leaders of Bill Clinton, V√°clav Havel and Tony Blair
respectively describing the war as, "an attack by tanks and artillery on a
largely defenseless people whose leaders already have agreed to peace," "the
first war for values" and one "to avert what would otherwise be a humanitarian
disaster in Kosovo.". Others included the then U.N. Secretary General Kofi
Annan who was reported by some sources as acknowledging that the NATO action
was legitimate who emphasised that there were times when the use of force was
legitimate in the pursuit of peace though Annan stressed that the "Council
should have been involved in any decision to use force." The distinction
between the legality and legitimacy of the intervention was further highlighted
in two separate reports: one conducted by the Independent International
Commission on Kosovo entitled The Kosovo Report which found that, "the NATO
military intervention was illegal but legitimate", and the second published by
the NATO Office of Information and Press which reported that, "the human rights
violations committed on a large scale in Kosovo provide an incontestable ground
with reference to the humanitarian aspect of NATO's intervention." Some critics
note that that NATO did not have the backing of the United Nations Security
Council meant that its intervention had no legal basis, but according to some
legal scholars, "there are nonetheless certain bases for that action that are
not legal, but justified.‚Äù Aside from politicians and diplomats, commentators
and intellectuals also supported the war. Michael Ignatieff called NATOs
intervention a "morally justifiable response to ethnic cleansing and the
resulting flood of refugees, and not the cause of the flood of refugees" while
Christopher Hitchens said NATO intervened only, "when Serbian forces had
resorted to mass deportation and full-dress ethnic "cleansing."" Writing in The
Nation, Richard A. Falk wrote that, "the NATO campaign achieved the removal of
Yugoslav military forces from Kosovo and, even more significant, the departure
of the dreaded Serbian paramilitary units and police" while an article in The
Guardian wrote that for Mary Kaldor, Kosovo represented a laboratory on her
thinking for human security, humanitarian intervention and international
peacekeeping, the latter two which she defined as, "a genuine belief in the
equality of all human beings; and this entails a readiness to risk lives of
peacekeeping troops to save the lives of others where this is necessary."
Criticism of the case for war. Some criticized the NATO intervention as a
political diversionary tactic, coming as it did on the heels of the Monica
Lewinsky scandal. Some support for this hypothesis may be found in the fact
that coverage of the bombing directly replaced coverage of the Monica Lewinsky
scandal in American news cycles. Also, some point out that before the bombing,
rather than there being an unusually bloody conflict, the KLA was not engaged
in a widespread civil war against Yugoslav forces and the death toll among all
concerned (including ethnic Albanians) skyrocketed after the NATO
intervention.; the absence of war did not mean the presence of peace between
Albanians and Serbians however as other sources have noted including: the
murder of 1500 Albanians and displacement of 270,000 before the NATO
intervention and the systematic repression of the Albanian population through
constitutional changes by the Milosevic regime that imposed an "apartheid" in
Kosovo. U.S. President Clinton and his administration were accused of inflating
the number of Kosovo Albanians killed by Serbians. After the bombing of the
Chinese embassy in Belgrade, Chinese Premier Jiang Zemin said that the US was
using its economic and military superiority to aggressively expand its
influence and interfere in the internal affairs of other countries. Chinese
leaders called the NATO campaign a dangerous precedent of naked aggression, a
new form of colonialism, and an aggressive war groundless in morality or law.
It was seen as part of a plot by the US to destroy Yugoslavia, expand eastward
and control all of Europe. The United Nations Charter does not allow military
interventions in other sovereign countries with few exceptions which, in
general, need to be decided upon by the United Nations Security Council; this
legal enjoinment has proved controversial with many legal scholars who argue
that though the Kosovo War illegal, it was still legitimate. The issue was
brought before the UN Security Council by Russia, in a draft resolution which,
"inter alia", would affirm "that such unilateral use of force constitutes a
flagrant violation of the United Nations Charter". China, Namibia, and Russia
voted for the resolution, the other members against, thus it failed to pass.
The war inflicted many casualties. Already by March 1999, the combination of
fighting and the targeting of civilians had left an estimated 1,500‚Äì2,000
civilians and combatants dead. Final estimates of the casualties are still
unavailable for either side. John Pilger said that the bombing campaign was
partly designed to prepare the way for a free market-based reconstruction by
wealthy foreign powers. Perhaps the most controversial deliberate attack of the
war was that made against the headquarters of Serbian television on April 23,
which killed at least fourteen people. NATO justified the attack on the grounds
that the Serbian television headquarters was part of the Milo≈°eviƒá regime's
"propaganda machine" and opponents of Milo≈°eviƒá inside Serbia charged that
the managers of the state TV station had been forewarned of the attack but
ordered staff to remain inside the building despite an air raid alert; a later
report conducted by the ICTY entitled Final Report to the Prosecutor by the
Committee Established to Review the NATO Bombing Campaign Against the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia opined that, "Insofar as the attack actually was aimed
at disrupting the communications network, it was legally acceptable" and that,
"NATO‚Äôs targeting of the RTS building for propaganda purposes was an
incidental (albeit complementary) aim of its primary goal of disabling the
Serbian military command and control system and to destroy the nerve system and
apparatus that keeps Miloseviƒá in power." In regards to civilian casualties,
it further stated that though they were, "unfortunately high, they do not
appear to be clearly disproportionate." Casualties. Civilian losses. In June
2000, the Red Cross reported that 3,368 civilians (2,500 Albanians, 400 Serbs,
and 100 Roma) were still missing, nearly one year after the conflict. A study
by researchers from the Center for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta,
Georgia published in 2000 in medical journal the Lancet estimated that "12,000
deaths in the total population" could be attributed to war. This number was
achieved by surveying 1,197 households from February 1998 through June 1999. 67
out of the 105 deaths reported in the sample population were attributed to war-
related trauma, which extrapolates to be 12,000 deaths if the same war-related
mortality rate is applied to Kosovo's total population. The highest mortality
rates were in men between 15 and 49 (5,421 victims of war) as well as for men
over 50 (5,176 victims). For persons younger than 15, the estimates were 160
victims for males and 200 for females. For women between 15‚Äì49 the estimate
is that there were 510 victims; older than 50 years the estimate is 541
victims. The authors stated that it is not "possible to differentiate
completely between civilian and military casualties". In the 2008 joint study
by the Humanitarian Law Center (an NGO from Serbia and Kosovo), The
International Commission on Missing Person, and the Missing Person Commission
of Serbia made a name-by-name list of war and post-war victims. According to
the Kosovo Memory Book, 13,421 people were killed in Kosovo during the
conflict, from 1 January 1998 up until December 2000. Of that sum, 10,533 were
Albanians, 2,238 were Serbs, 126 Roma, 100 Bosniaks and others. Civilians
killed by NATO airstrikes. Yugoslavia claimed that NATO attacks caused between
1,200 and 5,700 civilian casualties. NATO's Secretary General, Lord Robertson,
wrote after the war that "the actual toll in human lives will never be
precisely known" but he then offered the figures found in a report by Human
Rights Watch as a reasonable estimate. This report counted between 488 and 527
civilian deaths (90 to 150 of them killed from cluster bomb use) in 90 separate
incidents, the worst of which were the 87 Albanian refugees who perished at the
hands of NATO bombs, near Kori≈°a. Attacks in Kosovo overall were more deadly
due to the confused situation with many refugee movements‚Äî the one-third of
the incidents there account for more than half of the deaths. Civilians killed
by Yugoslav forces. Various estimates of the number of killings attributed to
Yugoslav forces have been announced through the years. The estimate of 10,000
deaths is used by the United States Department of State, which cited human
rights abuses as its main justification for attacking Yugoslavia. Statistical
experts working on behalf of the ICTY prosecution estimate that the total
number of dead is about 10,000. Eric Fruits, a professor at Portland State
University, argued that the experts' analyses were based on fundamentally
flawed data and that none of its conclusions are supported by any valid
statistical analysis or tests. In August 2000, the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) announced that it had exhumed 2,788
bodies in Kosovo, but declined to say how many were thought to be victims of
war crimes. Earlier however, KFOR sources told Agence France Presse that of the
2,150 bodies that had been discovered up until July 1999, about 850 were
thought to be victims of war crimes. NATO losses. Military casualties on the
NATO side were light. According to official reports, the alliance suffered no
fatalities as a result of combat operations. However, in the early hours of May
5, an American military AH-64 Apache helicopter crashed not far from the border
between Serbia and Albania. Another American AH-64 helicopter crashed about 40
miles (64¬ km) northeast of Tirana, Albania's capital, very close to the
Albanian/Kosovo border. According to CNN, the crash happened 45 miles (72¬ km)
northeast of Tirana. The two American pilots of the helicopter, Army Chief
Warrant Officers David Gibbs and Kevin L. Reichert, died in that crash. They
were the only NATO ground casualties during the war, according to NATO official
statements. There were other casualties after the war, mostly due to land
mines. After the war, the alliance reported the loss of the first US stealth
plane (an F-117A stealth fighter) ever shot down by enemy fire. Furthermore an
F-16 fighter was lost near ≈ abac and whose remains are on display in Museum of
Aviation in Belgrade, 32 unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) from different nations
were lost. The wreckages of downed UAVs were shown on Serbian television during
the war. Some claim a second F-117A was also heavily damaged, and although it
made it back to its base, it never flew again. A-10 Thunderbolts have been
reported as casualties, with two shot down and another two damaged. Three
soldiers of the United States Army have been snatched by Yugoslav Forces across
the Macedonian border. Yugoslav military losses. NATO did not release any
official casualty estimates. The Yugoslav authorities claimed 462 soldiers were
killed and 299 wounded by NATO airstrikes. The names of Yugoslav casualties
were recorded in a "book of remembrance". Of military equipment, NATO destroyed
around 50 Yugoslav aircraft including 6 MiG-29s destroyed in air-to-air combat.
A number of G-4 Super Galebs were destroyed in their hardened aircraft shelter
by bunker-busting bombs which started a fire which spread quickly because the
shelter doors were not closed. At the end of war, NATO officially claimed that
they had destroyed 93 Yugoslav tanks. Yugoslavia admitted a total of 3
destroyed tanks. The latter figure was verified by European inspectors when
Yugoslavia rejoined the Dayton accords, by noting the difference between the
number of tanks then and at the last inspection in 1995. NATO claimed that the
Yugoslav army lost 93 tanks (M-84's and T-55's), 132 APCs, and 52 artillery
pieces. Newsweek, the second-largest news weekly magazine in the U.S, gained
access to a suppressed US Air Force report that claimed the real numbers were
"3 tanks, not 120; 18 armored personnel carriers, not 220; 20 artillery pieces,
not 450". Most of the targets hit in Kosovo were decoys, such as tanks made out
of plastic sheets with telegraph poles for gun barrels, or old World War
II‚Äìera tanks which were not functional. Anti-aircraft defences were preserved
by the simple expedient of not turning them on, preventing NATO aircraft from
detecting them, but forcing them to keep above a ceiling of 15,000 feet
(5,000¬ m), making accurate bombing much more difficult. Towards the end of the
war, it was claimed that carpet bombing by B-52 aircraft had caused huge
casualties among Yugoslav troops stationed along the Kosovo‚ÄìAlbania border.
Careful searching by NATO investigators found no evidence of any such large-
scale casualties. However, the most significant loss for the Yugoslav Army was
the damaged and destroyed infrastructure. Almost all military air bases and
airfields (Batajnica, Laƒëevci, Slatina, Golubovci, Kovin, and ƒêakovica) and
other military buildings and facilities were badly damaged or destroyed. Unlike
the units and their equipment, military buildings couldn't be camouflaged.
thus, defence industry and military technical overhaul facilities were also
seriously damaged (Utva, Zastava Arms factory, Moma Stanojloviƒá air force
overhaul center, technical overhaul centers in ƒåaƒçak and Kragujevac).
Moreover, in an effort to weaken the Yugoslav Army, NATO targeted several
important civilian facilities (the Panƒçevo oil refinery, bridges, TV antennas,
railroads, etc.) KLA losses. Kosovo Liberation Army losses are difficult to
analyze. According to some reports there were around 1,000 fatalities on the
KLA side. Difficulties arise in calculating an accurate figure. Things are
complicated by the difficulty of determining who was a KLA member and who was a
civilian. For example, the Yugoslavs considered any armed Albanian to be a
member of the KLA, regardless of whether he was officially a card-carrying
member, so someone who is counted as a civilian by the Albanian side might be
counted as a KLA combatant by the Serbs. Also, many KLA members were not
wearing any uniforms and had no identification. Aftermath. Within three weeks,
over 500,000 Albanian refugees had returned home. By November 1999, according
to the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, 848,100 out of 1,108,913 had
returned. During the war, 90,000 Serbs fled from Kosovo. The Yugoslav Red Cross
had also registered 247,391 mostly Serbian refugees by November. The persistent
anti-Serb attacks and riots, including against other non-Albanians, had
remained in the anarchic stage until some form of order was established in
2001. This order disintegrated during the 2004 pogrom against non Albanians.
More than 164,000 Serbs have left Kosovo during the seven weeks since Yugoslav
and Serb forces withdrew and the NATO-led Kosovo Force (KFOR) entered the
province. War crimes. Serbian war crimes. The International Criminal Tribunal
for the former Yugoslavia charged Milo≈°eviƒá with crimes against humanity,
violating the laws or customs of war, grave breaches of the Geneva Conventions
and genocide for his role during the wars in Croatia, Bosnia, and Kosovo.
Before the end of the bombing, Yugoslav President Slobodan Milo≈°eviƒá, along
with Milan Milutinoviƒá, Nikola ≈ ainoviƒá, Dragoljub Ojdaniƒá and Vlajko
Stojiljkoviƒá were charged by the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) with crimes against humanity including murder,
forcible transfer, deportation, and "persecution on political, racial or
religious grounds". Further indictments were leveled in October 2003 against
former armed forces chief of staff Neboj≈°a Pavkoviƒá, former army corps
commander Vladimir Lazareviƒá, former police official Vlastimir ƒêorƒëeviƒá,
and the current head of Serbia's public security, Sreten Lukiƒá. All were
indicted for crimes against humanity and violations of the laws or customs of
war. War crimes prosecutions have also been carried out in Yugoslavia. Yugoslav
soldier Ivan Nikoliƒá was found guilty in 2002 of war crimes in the deaths of
two civilians in Kosovo. A significant number of Yugoslav soldiers were tried
by Yugoslav military tribunals during the war. Albanian war crimes. The ICTY
also leveled indictments against KLA members Fatmir Limaj, Haradin Bala, Isak
Musliu, and Agim Murtezi for crimes against humanity. They were arrested on
February 17 and 18, 2003. Charges were soon dropped against Agim Murtezi as a
case of mistaken identity, whereas Fatmir Limaj was acquitted of all charges on
November 30, 2005 and released. The charges were in relation to the prison camp
run by the defendants at Lapu≈°nik between May and July 1998. In 2008, Carla
Del Ponte published a book in which she alleged that, after the end of the war
in 1999, Kosovo Albanians were smuggling organs of between 100 and 300 Serbs
and other minorities from the province to Albania. The ICTY and the Serbian War
Crimes Tribunal are currently investigating these allegations, as numerous
witnesses and new materials have recently emerged. On March 2005, a U.N.
tribunal indicted Kosovo Prime Minister Ramush Haradinaj for war crimes against
the Serbs. On March 8, he tendered his resignation. Haradinaj, an ethnic
Albanian, was a former commander who led units of the Kosovo Liberation Army
and was appointed Prime Minister after winning an election of 72 votes to three
in the Kosovo's Parliament in December 2004. Haradinaj was acquitted on all
counts. The Office of the Prosecutor has appealed his acquittal, and as of July
2008, the matter remains unresolved. NATO war crimes. The Yugoslav government
and a number of international pressure groups (e.g. Amnesty International)
claimed that NATO had carried out war crimes during the conflict, notably the
bombing of the Serbian TV headquarters in Belgrade on April 23, 1999, where 16
people were killed and 16 more were injured. Sian Jones of Amnesty stated, "The
bombing of the headquarters of Serbian state radio and television was a
deliberate attack on a civilian object and as such constitutes a war crime".
However, a later report conducted by the ICTY entitled Final Report to the
Prosecutor by the Committee Established to Review the NATO Bombing Campaign
Against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia sided with NATO's version of the
attack, opining that, "Insofar as the attack actually was aimed at disrupting
the communications network, it was legally acceptable" and that, "NATO‚Äôs
targeting of the RTS building for propaganda purposes was an incidental (albeit
complementary) aim of its primary goal of disabling the Serbian military
command and control system and to destroy the nerve system and apparatus that
keeps Miloseviƒá in power." In regards to civilian casualties, it further
stated that though they were, "unfortunately high, they do not appear to be
clearly disproportionate." Activist/Writer Noam Chomsky claims this is
inaccurate as the mass exodus of civilians did not occur until after the NATO
bombing, and in his view NATO acted without the support of the United Nations
and therefore this constitutes a war crime. Military and political
consequences. The Kosovo war had a number of important consequences in terms of
the military and political outcome. The status of Kosovo remains unresolved;
international negotiations began in 2006 to determine the level of autonomy
Kosovo would have, as envisaged under UN Security Council Resolution 1244, but
failed. The province is administered by the United Nations despite its
unilateral declaration of independence on February 17, 2008. The UN-backed
talks, led by UN Special Envoy Martti Ahtisaari, had begun in February 2006.
Whilst progress was made on technical matters, both parties remained
diametrically opposed on the question of status itself. In February 2007,
Ahtisaari delivered a draft status settlement proposal to leaders in Belgrade
and Pristina, the basis for a draft UN Security Council Resolution which
proposes "supervised independence" for the province, which is in contrary to UN
Security Council Resolution 1244. By July 2007, the draft resolution, which was
backed by the United States, United Kingdom, and other European members of the
Security Council, had been rewritten four times to try to accommodate Russian
concerns that such a resolution would undermine the principle of state
sovereignty. Russia, which holds a veto in the Security Council as one of five
permanent members, stated that it would not support any resolution which is not
acceptable to both Belgrade and Pri≈°tina. The campaign exposed significant
weaknesses in the U.S. arsenal, which were later addressed for the Afghanistan
and Iraq campaigns. Apache attack helicopters and AC-130 Spectre gunships were
brought up to the front lines but were never actually used after two Apaches
crashed during training in the Albanian mountains. Stocks of many precision
missiles were run down to critically low levels; had the campaign lasted much
longer, NATO would have had to revert back to using "dumb" bombs for lack of
anything better. The situation was not any better with the combat aircraft;
continuous operations meant skipped maintenance schedules and many aircraft
were withdrawn from service awaiting spare parts and service. Also, many of the
precision-guided weapons proved unable to cope with Balkan weather, as the
clouds blocked the laser guidance beams. This was resolved by retrofitting
bombs with Global Positioning System satellite guidance devices that are immune
to bad weather. Also, although pilotless surveillance aircraft were extensively
used, it often proved the case that attack aircraft could not be brought to the
scene quickly enough to hit targets of opportunity. This led to the fitting of
missiles to Predator drones in Afghanistan, reducing the "sensor to shooter"
time to virtually nothing. Military decorations. As a result of the Kosovo War,
the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation created a second NATO medal, the NATO
Medal for Kosovo Service, an international military decoration. Shortly
thereafter, NATO created the Non-Article 5 Medal for Balkans service to combine
both Yugoslavian and Kosovo operations into one service medal. Due to the
involvement of the United States armed forces, a separate U.S. military
decoration, known as the Kosovo Campaign Medal, was established by President
Bill Clinton in 2000. Weaponry & Vehicular Units used on all sides. A variety
of weapons were used by the Yugoslav security forces and the Kosovo Liberation
Army during the conflict. NATO only operated aircraft and various naval units
for the duration of the conflict. The following weapons used by Yugoslav
government forces are listed below. Most of them were Yugoslav made weaponry,
while almost all of the AA units were Soviet made. The following weapons used
by the Kosovo Liberation Army are listed below. They mostly consist of Soviet
Kalashnikov weaponry, also Chinese derivatives of the AK-47 and some Western
weaponry. The following aircraft used by NATO are listed below. Literature. and
in novels
