Kuril Islands The Kuril Islands or Kurile Islands (, , or ; ; Japanese: ), in
Russia's Sakhalin Oblast region, form a volcanic archipelago that stretches
approximately northeast from Hokkaido, Japan, to Kamchatka, Russia, separating
the Sea of Okhotsk from the North Pacific Ocean. There are 56 islands and many
more minor rocks. It consists of Greater Kuril Ridge and Lesser Kuril Ridge.
The total land area is about and total population about 19,000. All of the
islands are under the Russian jurisdiction, but Japan claims the two
southernmost large islands (Iturup and Kunashir) as part of its territory, as
well as Shikotan and the Habomai islets, which has led to the ongoing Kuril
Islands dispute. Nomenclature. The name "Kuril" originates from the autonym of
the aboriginal Ainu, the islands' original inhabitants: "kur", meaning man. It
may also be related to names for other islands that have traditionally been
inhabited by the Ainu people, such as "Kuyi" or "Kuye" for Sakhalin and "Kai"
for Hokkaidō. In Japanese, the Kuril Islands are known as the Chishima Islands
(Kanji: , literally, "Thousand Islands Archipelago"), also known as the Kuriru
Islands (Kanji: , literally, "Kuril Archipelago"). Once the Russians reached
the islands in the 18th century they found a pseudo-etymology from Russian
"kurit" ("курить" - "to smoke") due to the continual fumes and steam
above the islands from volcanoes. Geography. The Kuril Islands form part of the
ring of tectonic instability encircling the Pacific ocean referred to as the
Ring of Fire. The islands themselves are summits of stratovolcanoes that are a
direct result of the subduction of the Pacific Plate under the Okhotsk Plate,
which forms the Kuril Trench some east of the islands. The chain has around 100
volcanoes, some 40 of which are active, and many hot springs and fumaroles.
There is frequent seismic activity, including a magnitude 8.5 earthquake in
1963 and one of magnitude 8.3 recorded on November 15, 2006, which resulted in
tsunami waves up to reaching the California coast. The climate on the islands
is generally severe, with long, cold, stormy winters and short and notoriously
foggy summers. The average annual precipitation is , most of which falls as
snow. The chain ranges from temperate to sub-Arctic climate types, and the
vegetative cover consequently ranges from tundra in the north to dense spruce
and larch forests on the larger southern islands. The highest elevations on the
islands are Alaid volcano (highest point: ) on Atlasov Island at the northern
end of the chain and Tyatya volcano () on Kunashir Island at the southern end.
Landscape types and habitats on the islands include many kinds of beach and
rocky shores, cliffs, wide rivers and fast gravelly streams, forests,
grasslands, alpine tundra, crater lakes and peat bogs. The soils are generally
productive, owing to the periodic influxes of volcanic ash and, in certain
places, owing to significant enrichment by seabird guano. However, many of the
steep, unconsolidated slopes are susceptible to landslides and newer volcanic
activity can entirely denude a landscape. Marine ecology. Owing to their
location along the Pacific shelf edge and the confluence of Okhotsk Sea gyre
and the southward Oyashio Current, the Kuril islands are surrounded by waters
that are among the most productive in the North Pacific, supporting a wide
range and high abundance of marine life. Invertebrates: Extensive kelp beds
surrounding almost every island provide crucial habitat for sea urchins,
various mollusks and countless other invertebrates and their associated
predators. Many species of squid provide a principal component of the diet of
many of the smaller marine mammals and birds along the chain. Fish: Further
offshore, walleye pollock, Pacific cod, several species of flatfish are of the
greatest commercial importance. During the 1980s, migratory Japanese sardine
was one of the most abundant fish in the summer and the main commercial
species, but the fishery collapsed and by 1993 no sardines were reported caught
leading to significant economic contraction in the few settlements on the
islands. Several salmon species, notably pink and sockeye, spawn on some of the
larger islands. Pinnipeds: The Kuril islands are home to two species of Eared
Seal, the Steller Sea Lion and northern fur seal, both of which aggregate on
several smaller islands along the chain in the summer to form several of the
largest reproductive rookeries in Russia. A distinct Kuril island subspecies of
the Common Seal ("Phoca vitulina stejnegeri") and Largha are also abundant.
Pinnipeds were a significant object of harvest for the indigenous populations
of the Kuril islands, both for food and materials such as skin and bone. The
long term fluctuations in the range and distribution of human settlements along
the Kuril island presumably tracked the pinniped ranges. In historical times,
fur seals were heavily exploited for their fur in the 19th and early 20th
centuries and several of the largest reproductive rookeries, as on Raykoke
island, were extirpated. In contrast, commercial harvest of the true seals and
Steller Sea Lions has been relatively insignificant on the Kuril islands
proper. Since the 1960s there has been essentially no additional harvest and
the pinniped populations in the Kuril islands appear to be fairly healthy and
in some cases expanding. The notable exception is the now extinct Japanese Sea
lion which was known to occasionally haul out on the Kuril islands. Sea otters
were exploited very heavily for their pelts in the 19th century. Indeed, the
pursuit of the valuable otter pelts drove the expansion of the Russians onto
the islands and much of the Japanese interest. Their numbers consequently
dwindled rapidly. A near total ban on harvest since the mid 20th century has
allowed the species to recover and they are now reasonably abundant throughout
the chain. Cetaceans: The most abundant cetaceans include Orcas, Harbor and
Dall's Porpoises. Baird's and Cuvier's Beaked Whales, Minke Whales, Fin Whales,
and Sperm Whales are also observed regularly. The surrounding water is
considered as the major habitat for North Pacific Right Whales, one of the most
endangered of all whale species. Seabirds: The Kuril islands are home to many
millions of seabirds, including Northern Fulmars, Tufted Puffins, Murres,
Kittiwakes, Guillemots, Auklets, Petrels, Gulls, Cormorants. On many of the
smaller islands in summer, where terrestrial predators are absent, virtually
every possibly hummock, cliff niche or underneath of boulder is occupied by a
nesting bird. Terrestrial ecology. The composition of terrestrial species on
the Kuril islands is dominated by Asian mainland taxa via migration from
Hokkaido and Sakhalin Islands and by Kamchatkan taxa from the North. While
highly diverse, there is a relatively low level of endemism. Because of the
generally smaller size and isolation of the central islands, few major
terrestrial mammals have colonized these, though red and arctic foxes were
introduced for the sake of the fur trade in the 1880s. The bulk of the
terrestrial mammal biomass is taken up by rodents, many introduced in
historical times. The largest southernmost and northernmost islands are
inhabited by brown bear, foxes, and martens. Some species of deer are found on
the more southerly islands. It is claimed that a wild cat, the Kurilian
Bobtail, originates from the Kuril Islands. The bobtail is due to the mutation
of a dominant gene. The cat has been domesticated and exported to nearby Russia
and bred there, becoming a popular domestic cat. Among terrestrial birds,
ravens, peregrine falcons, some wrens and wagtails are common. Human settlement
history. The Ainu people were early inhabitants of Kuril Islands, although
there are few records that pre-date the 17th century. The Japanese
administration first took nominal control of the islands in the Edo period of
Japan, in the form of claims by the Matsumae clan. It is claimed that the
Japanese knew of the northern islands 370 years ago. On "Shōhō Onkuko Ezu", a
map of Japan made by the Tokugawa shogunate, in 1644, there are 39 large and
small islands shown northeast of the Shiretoko peninsula and Cape Nosappu. The
Russian Empire began to advance into the Kurils in the early 17th century.
Although the Russians often sent expedition parties for research and hunted sea
otters, they never went south of Urup island. Russian settlements extended as
far as Iturup in the 18th century. Parts of the islands south of Iturup were
occupied by guards of the Tokugawa shogunate. In 1811, Russian Captain Vasily
Golovnin and his crew, who stopped at Kunashir during their hydrographic
survey, were captured by retainers of the Nambu clan, and sent to the Matsumae
authorities. Because a Japanese trader, Takadaya Kahei, was also captured by
Petr Rikord, Captain of a Russian vessel near Kunashir in 1812, Japan and
Russia entered into negotiations to establish the border between the two
countries. The "Treaty of Commerce, Navigation and Delimitation" was concluded
in 1855, and the border was established between Iturup and Urup. This border
confirmed that Japanese territory stretched south from Iturup and Russian
territory stretched north of Urup. Sakhalin remained a place where people from
both countries could live. The Treaty of Saint Petersburg in 1875 resulted in
Japan relinquishing all rights over Sakhalin in exchange for Russia ceding all
of the Kuril Islands south of Kamchatka. During the Russo-Japanese War of
1904–1905, Gunji, a retired Japanese military man and local settler in
Shumshu, led an invading party to the Kamchatka coast. Russia sent
reinforcements to the area to capture and intern this group. After the war was
over, Japan received fishing rights in Russian waters as part of the Russo-
Japanese Fisheries Agreement until 1945. During their armed intervention in
Siberia 1918–1925, Japanese forces from the northern Kurils, along with
United States and European forces, occupied southern Kamchatka. Japanese
vessels made naval strikes against Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky. The Soviet Union
seized southern Sakhalin and the Kuril islands at the end of World War II.
Japan maintains a claim to the four southernmost islands of Kunashir, Iturup,
Shikotan, and the Habomai rocks, together called the "Northern Islands
Territories" (see Kuril Islands dispute). Japanese administration. In 1869, the
Meiji government established the Colonization Commission in Sapporo to aid in
the development of the northern area. Ezo was renamed Hokkaidō and Kita Ezo
later received the name of Karafuto. Eleven provinces and 86 districts were
founded by Meiji government and were put under the control of feudal clans.
Because the Meiji government could not sufficiently cope with Russians moving
to south Sakhalin, Japan negotiated with Russia over control of the Kuril
Islands, resulting in the Treaty of Saint Petersburg that ceded the eighteen
islands north of Uruppu to Japan and all of Sakhalin to Russia. Road networks
and post offices were established on Kunashiri and Etorofu. Life on the islands
became more stable when a regular sea route connecting islands with Hokkaidō
was opened and a telegraphic system began. At the end of the Taishō period,
towns and villages were organized in the northern territories and village
offices were established on each island. The Habomai island towns were all part
of Habomai Village for example. In other cases the town and village system was
not adopted on islands north of Uruppu, which were under direct control of the
Nemuro Subprefectural office of the Hokkaidō government. Each village had a
district forestry system, a marine product examination center, salmon hatchery,
post office, police station, elementary school, Shinto temple, and other public
facilities. In 1930, 8,300 people lived on Kunashiri island and 6,000 on
Etorofu island, and most of them were engaged in coastal and high sea fishing.
There were 17,291 Japanese islanders on the Kurils. Current situation and the
economy. As of 2003, roughly 16,800 people (ethnic Russians, Ukrainians,
Belarusians, Tatars, Nivkhs, Oroch) inhabited the Kuril Islands. Fishing is the
primary occupation. The islands have strategic and economic value, in terms of
fisheries and also mineral deposits of pyrite, sulfur, and various polymetallic
ores. In recent times the economic rise of the Russian Federation has been seen
on the Kurils too. The most visible sign of improvement is the new construction
in infrastructure. Construction workers are now working vigorously to build a
pier and a breakwater in Kitovy Bay, central Iturup, where barges are still a
major means of transport sailing between the cove and ships anchored offshore.
A new road has been carved through the woods near Kurilsk, the island's biggest
village, going to the site of an airport scheduled to open in 2010 at a cost of
1.26 billion rubles (US$44 million). Gidrostroy, the Kurils' biggest business
group with interests in fishing as well as construction and real estate, built
its second fish processing factory on Iturup island in 2006, introducing a
state-of-the-art conveyor system. To deal with a rise in the demand of
electricity, the local government is also upgrading a state-run geothermal
power plant at Mount Baransky, an active volcano, where steam and hot water can
be found. Military. The main Russian force stationed on the islands is the 18th
Machine Gun Artillery Division, which has its headquarters in Goryachiye
Klyuchi on Iturup Island. There are also Border Guard Service troops stationed
on the islands. According to analysts, the division is unlikely to be able to
defend the islands against an attack on its own. In February 2011, Russian
President Dmitry Medvedev called for substantial reinforcements of the Kuril
Islands defences following the heating up of the dispute in early 2011. Atlasov
Island. The second northernmost, Atlasov Island (Oyakoba in Japanese), is an
almost perfect volcanic cone rising sheer out of the sea; it has been praised
by the Japanese in haiku, wood-block prints, and other forms, in much the same
way as the better-known Mt. Fuji. List of the islands. While in Russian sources
the islands are mentioned for the first time in 1646, the earliest detailed
information about them was provided by the explorer Vladimir Atlasov in 1697.
In the 18th and early 19th centuries, the Kuril Islands were explored by Danila
Antsiferov, I.Kozyrevsky, Ivan Yevreinov, Fyodor Luzhin, Martin Shpanberg, Adam
Johann von Krusenstern, Vasily Golovnin, and Henry James Snow. North Kurils
(Kita-chishima / 北千島) South Kurils (Minami-chishima / 南千島)
