Latino (demonym) Latino or is a term used chiefly in the United States to refer
to people of Latin American extraction or descent, though the term has also
been incorrectly used as a synonym for "Hispanic". "Hispanic" is a narrower
term which only refers to persons of Spanish-speaking origin or ancestry, while
"Latino" is more frequently used to refer more generally to anyone of Latin
American origin or ancestry, including Brazilians. The term "latino" is used to
refer to males only or a combination of males and females in a group, whereas
the term latina is used to refer to females only. The U.S. Government has
defined "Hispanic or Latino" persons as being "persons who trace their origin .
. . Central and South America, and other Spanish cultures." The United States
Census uses the ethnonym "Hispanic or Latino" to refer to "persons who trace
their origin or descent to Colombia,Mexico, Puerto Rico, Cuba, Spanish speaking
Central and South America countries, and other Spanish cultures." It is also
stated that, "Origin can be considered as the heritage, nationality group,
lineage, or country of the person or the person's parents or ancestors before
their arrival in the United States. People who identify their origin as
Hispanic or Latino may be of any race." The AP Stylebook's recommended usage of
Latino includes not only persons of Spanish-speaking ancestry, but also more
generally includes persons "from -- or whose ancestors were from -- . . . Latin
America," including Brazilians. Etymology. The terms "latino" and "latina"
originate from American Spanish, and ultimately from the Latin terms "latinus"
and "latina", which literally mean "Latin". The terms may be an abbreviated
form of the Spanish word "latinoamericano" (Latin American). This use of the
expression "Latin" derives from the cultural distinctions between the Romance
language countries of modern-day Italy, Spain, France and Portugal; and other
European nations, including the Germanic countries of Northwestern and Central
Europe. These distinctions grew as the Germanic countries tended to embrace
Protestantism while the Romance language countries remained Roman Catholic. In
its modern usage, the idea that a part of the Americas has affinity with the
Romance cultures as a whole can be traced back to the 1830s, in the writing of
the French Saint-Simonian Michel Chevalier, who postulated that this part of
the Americas was inhabited by people of a "Latin race" and that it could,
therefore, ally itself with "Latin Europe" in a struggle with "Teutonic
Europe", "Anglo-Saxon America" and "Slavic Europe". The term Latin America was
supported by the French Empire of Napoleon III during the French invasion of
Mexico, as a way to include France among countries with influence in America
and to exclude Anglophone countries, and played a role in his campaign to imply
cultural kinship of the region with France. The idea was taken up by Latin
American intellectuals and political leaders of the mid- and late-nineteenth
century, who no longer looked to Spain or Portugal as cultural models, but
rather to France. Use in the United States. The term "Latino" was officially
adopted in 1997 by the United States Government in the ethnonym "Hispanic or
Latino", which replaced the single term "Hispanic": "Because regional usage of
the terms differs – Hispanic is commonly used in the eastern portion of the
United States, whereas Latino is commonly used in the western portion." Neither
"Hispanic" nor "Latino" refers to a race, as a person of Latino/Hispanic
ethnicity can be of any race. Like non-Latinos, a Latino can be of any race or
combination of races: White/Caucasian, Black/African American, Asian, Native
American, Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander American, or two or more
races. While Brazilian Americans are not included with Hispanics and Latinos in
the government's census population reports, any Brazilian American can report
as being Hispanic or Latino since Hispanic or Latino origin is, like race, a
matter of self-identification. Other federal and local government agencies and
non-profit organizations include Brazilians and Portuguese in their definition
of "Hispanic". The U.S. Department of Transportation defines "Hispanic" as,
"persons of Mexican, Puerto Rican, Cuban, Dominican, Central or South American,
or others Spanish or Portuguese culture or origin, regardless of race." This
definition has been adopted by the Small Business Administration as well as by
many federal, state, and municipal agencies for the purposes of awarding
government contracts to minority owned businesses. The Congressional Hispanic
Caucus and the Congressional Hispanic Conference include representatives of
Spanish and Portuguese descent. The Hispanic Society of America is dedicated to
the study of the arts and cultures of Spain, Portugal, and Latin America. The
Hispanic Association of Colleges and Universities, which proclaims itself the
champion of Hispanic success in higher education, has member institutions in
the U.S., Puerto Rico, Latin America, Spain, and Portugal.  The AP Stylebook
also distinguishes between the terms Hispanic and Latino. The Stylebook limits
the term "Hispanic" to persons "from - or whose ancestors were from - a
Spanish-speaking land or culture." It provides a more expansive definition,
however, of the term "Latino." The Stylebook definition of Latino includes not
only persons of Spanish-speaking ancestry, but also more generally includes
persons "from -- or whose ancestors were from -- . . . Latin America." The
Stylebook specifically lists "Brazilian" as an example of a group which can be
considered Latino. Listed below are the 28 categories tabulated in the 2000
United States Census: Mexican, Puerto Rican, Cuban, Dominican Republic; Central
American: Costa Rican, Guatemalan, Honduran, Nicaraguan, Panamanian,
Salvadoran, Other Central American; South American: Argentinian, Bolivian,
Chilean, Colombian, Ecuadorian, Paraguayan, Peruvian, Uruguayan, Venezuelan,
Other South American; Other Hispanic or Latino: Spaniard, Spanish, Spanish
American, All other Hispanic or Latino. Criticism. The term Latino, despite its
increasing popularity, is still highly debated among those who are called by
the name. Since the adoption of the term by the US Census Bureau and its
subsequent widespread use, there have been several controversies and
disagreements, specially in the United States and, to a lesser extent, in
Mexico and other Spanish-speaking countries. Regarding it as an arbitrary
generic term, many Latin American scholars, journalists and indigenous rights
organisations have objected against the mass media use of the word "Latino",
pointing out that such ethnonyms are optional and should be used only to
describe people involved in the practices, ideologies and identity politics of
their supporters. Acuña, Rodolfo, "U.S. Latino issues", Greenwood Publishing
Group, 2003 ISBN 0-313-32211-2 Popular personalities like Andy García have
also expressed concern. He has stated that, in spite of his love of his native
Cuba, he dislikes being labeled as a 'Latino actor', preferring instead to be
addressed as an actor without a tag attached to him. Definitions in other
languages. The term "latino" (feminine "latina") in the Romance languages, such
as Italian, Portuguese, and Spanish, literally translates as "Latin". The
cognate French term is "Latin", not "Latino". Portuguese dictionaries define
the demonym "latino" to refer to natives of Romance-speaking nations influenced
by Roman civilization, and to the natives or inhabitants of ancient Latium
(modern Lazio). Italian dictionaries define the demonym "latino" as: the
ancient Latins and Romans, and their language, Latin, as well as the neo-Latin
nations. The dictionary of the Real Academia Española defines ten meanings for
"latino", including the ancient peoples of Latium and the modern Romance-
speaking European and American nations. In these languages, "latino", just like
any other demonym, is by convention not capitalized.
