Majestic 12 Majestic 12 (or MJ-12) is the supposed code name of an alleged
secret committee of scientists, military leaders, and government officials,
formed in 1947 by an executive order by U.S. President Harry S. Truman. The
purpose of the committee would be to investigate the recovery of a UFO north of
Roswell, New Mexico during July 1947. Initial indications of such a group's
existence appeared in 1978 in declassified Canadian documents. Another
reference to a classified group called "MJ-12" was discovered in 1980, but was
later claimed to be a hoax. In 1984 a set of documents were discovered in
United States archives, which closely resemble real declassified documents, but
which the FBI have declared to be "completely bogus". UFO conspiracy theories
sometimes incorporate Majestic 12. Initial discoveries. In 1978, Canadian
researcher Arthur Bray uncovered previously classified Canadian UFO documents
naming Dr. Vannevar Bush as heading a highly secret UFO investigation group
within the U.S. Research and Development Board. No name for the group was
given. Bray published excerpts of the documents in his 1979 book, "The U.F.O.
Connection". The author of the documents, Wilbert Smith, was a UFOlogist
working in the Canadian Department of Transport who is not known to have had
any security clearance, and the skeptical researcher Christopher D. Allan
concludes that there is no way any such group headed by Bush could have come to
his knowledge. On the contrary, Smith's claims could have instigated the MJ-12
hoax. The earliest appearance of the term "MJ Twelve" was a message of unclear
origin dated November 17, 1980. This so-called "Project Aquarius" Teletype
message had been given to Albuquerque physicist and businessman Paul Bennewitz
in November, 1980, by U.S. Air Force Office of Special Investigations
counterintelligence officer Richard C. Doty. Bennewitz had photographed and
recorded electronic data of what he believed to be UFO activity over nearby
Kirtland AFB, a sensitive nuclear facility. Bennewitz reported his findings to
officials at Kirtland, including Doty. In 1989, the UFOlogist Bill Moore
claimed that the documents were actually a hoax created by Doty as part of an
attempt to drive Bennewitz insane. One sentence in the lengthy Teletype message
read, "The official US Government policy and results of Project Aquarius is
still classified TOP SECRET with no dissemination outside channels and with
access restricted to 'MJ TWELVE.'" In 1983, Doty also contacted UFO researcher
and journalist Linda Moulton Howe, revealing alleged high-level UFO documents,
including those describing crashed alien flying saucers and recovery of aliens.
Doty again mentioned MJ-12, explaining that “MJ” stood for “Majority”
(not “Majestic”). Because the entire MJ-12 affair made its first appearance
only a year after Bray had made public the incriminating Canadian documents
about the secret UFO committee, one theory is that the Project Aquarius
Teletype message was part of a counterintelligence hoax to discredit the
information in the just-revealed Canadian documents. Thus the various MJ-12
documents could be fake, but the secret committee described in the verified
Canadian documents could still have been real. (See Arguments for below)
Moore's fictional MJ-12 in 1982-3. In 1982 Moore approached nuclear physicist
and UFO researcher Stanton T. Friedman about creating bogus Roswell documents,
with the idea of encouraging witnesses to come forward. Also, in early 1982,
Moore had approached former "National Enquirer" reporter Bob Pratt (who had
first published a story on Roswell in the "Enquirer" in 1980). Moore asked
Pratt to collaborate on a novel called "MAJIK-12". As a result of this
behavior, Pratt always believed that the Majestic-12 papers were a hoax, either
perpetrated personally by Moore or perhaps by AFOSI, with Doty using Moore as a
willing target. Noted UFO skeptic Philip J. Klass also argued that Moore was
the most likely hoaxer of the initial batch of MJ-12 documents. Moore, however,
flatly denied creating the documents, but eventually thought that maybe he had
been set up. Unlike Pratt, who was convinced they were a hoax, Friedman would
investigate the historical and technical details in the MJ-12 documents and
become their staunchest defender. In 1983, Moore approached UFOlogist Brad
Sparks and asked him about a plan to create counterfeit government UFO
documents, hoping to induce former military officers to speak out. Sparks
strongly urged Moore not to do this. Moore also showed Sparks a copy of the
Aquarius message. Moore and Shandera's 1984-5 discoveries. What came to be
known as the "MJ-12 papers" – detailing a secret UFO committee allegedly
involving Vannevar Bush – first appeared on a roll of film in late 1984 in
the mailbox of television documentary producer (and amateur ufologist) Jaime
Shandera. Shandera had been collaborating with Bill Moore since 1980. Moore
said in 1989 that these documents were also a hoax created by Doty.
Furthermore, the film mailed to Shandera with the MJ-12 documents was
postmarked "Albuquerque," raising the obvious suspicion that the MJ-12
documents were more bogus documents arising from Doty and AFOSI in Albuquerque.
The Eisenhower briefing document. The film allegedly received by Shandera in
1984 consisted of two MJ-12 documents. The main document, dated November 18,
1952, was supposedly prepared by Rear Admiral Roscoe Hillenkoetter, the first
CIA director, to brief incoming president Dwight Eisenhower on the committee's
progress. The document lists all the MJ-12 members and discusses United States
Air Force investigations and concealment of a crashed alien spacecraft near
Roswell, New Mexico, plus another crash in northern Mexico in December 1950.
Eisenhower did indeed receive extensive briefings from alleged MJ12 member
Walter Bedell Smith in Atlanta on November 15, 1952, and a briefing at the
Pentagon on November 18, 1952, by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, which would have
included alleged MJ-12 members Twining and Vandenberg. However, Eisenhower’s
Pentagon briefings are still classified and thus the subject matter discussed
remains speculative. The Cutler/Twining memo. In 1985, Shandera and Moore began
receiving post cards postmarked “New Zealand” with a return address of "Box
189, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia." The cards contained a series of cryptic messages
referring to "Reeses not "Reece's", according to Blum, 1990--> Pieces" and
"Suitland" (among other terms) that Shandera and Moore assumed were a code;
however, they were unable to "decode" the seeming message. A few months later,
a happenstance request from Friedman unlocked the mystery: busy due to previous
obligations, Friedman asked Moore and Shandera to examine newly declassified
Air Force documents at the National Archives (NARA) repository in Suitland,
Maryland; the head archivist there was named Ed Reese. After a few days in
Suitland, Shandera and Moore discovered yet another MJ-12 document, the so-
called Cutler/Twining memo, dated July 14, 1954. Interestingly enough, the memo
turned up in "Box 189" of the record group. In this memo, NSC Executive
Secretary and Eisenhower’s National Security Advisor Robert Cutler informed
Air Force Chief of Staff (and alleged MJ-12 member) Nathan Twining of a change
of plans in a scheduled MJ-12 briefing. The Cutler-Twining memo lacked a
distinctive catalog number, leading many to suspect that whether hoaxed or
genuine, the memo was almost certainly planted in the archives. Moore and
Shandera have been accused of hoaxing the memo and then planting it in the
archives. However, Friedman notes that the memo, unlike the other early MJ-12
papers which were available only as photos, is on original onionskin paper
widely used by the government at that time (1953 - early 70's) and unavailable
in stationery stores. The document also has some subtle historical and other
details that a civilian hoaxer would be unlikely to know, such as a red pencil
declassification marking also found with the other declassified files.
Furthermore, NARA security procedures would make it difficult for a visitor to
the Archives to plant such a document; even the skeptical Klass argued that
NARA security procedures made it highly unlikely that Shandera and Moore could
have planted the Cutler-Twining memo in the archives. Instead, Friedman has
argued that one of the many Air Force personnel involved in declassifying NARA
documents could easily have planted the Cutler/Twining memo in with other
unrelated documents. However, most researchers have argued that various subtle
details point to a forgery. For example, the date of the alleged MJ-12 meeting
does not correspond to any known meeting of import (see Arguments against for
more examples). However, this doesn’t negate Friedman’s point that the memo
could have been planted by someone in the Air Force. Other theories about the
MJ-12 group. Since the first MJ-12 documents, thousands of pages of other
supposedly leaked government documents mentioning MJ-12 and a government
coverup of UFOs have also appeared. All of them are controversial, with many
disputing their authenticity. A few have been proven to be unquestionably
fraudulent, usually retyped rewrites of unrelated government documents. The
most notable "new" MJ-12 document is a lengthy, Linotype-set manual allegedly
dating from 1954, called the MJ-12 "Special Operations Manual (SOM)". It deals
primarily with the handling of crash debris and alien bodies. Objections to its
authenticity usually center on questions of style and some historical
anachronisms. Another government group recently associated with MJ-12 was the
CIA's Office of National Estimates or ONE, a forerunner of the current National
Intelligence Council (NIC). ONE was created in 1950 by CIA director Gen. Walter
Bedell Smith, alleged to have replaced Secretary of Defense James Forrestal on
MJ-12 after his death. A history of the NIC states that ONE was a type of super
branch of the CIA "whose sole task was to produce coordinated 'National
Intelligence Estimates.'" Besides Smith, it apparently consisted of 11 other
members. A recent article on the history of the CIA's involvement in UFO
investigations states that ONE received a UFO intelligence briefing on January
30, 1953, immediately after the end of the CIA's UFO debunking study known as
the Robertson Panel. Members of ONE at that time included FBI director J. Edgar
Hoover, William Bundy, President Eisenhower's chief of staff Admiral B. Bieri,
and William Langer, a Harvard historian, who was chairman. Referring to ONE as
"super think tank" within the CIA, the article states, "ONE is as close as we
get to a documented version of the rumoured Majestic-12 group." Connection to
the secret Pratt documents. At the Mutual UFO Network (MUFON) 2007 Symposium in
Denver, Colorado, UFO researcher Brad Sparks presented a paper that describes
the MJ-12 documents as an elaborate disinformation campaign perpetrated by Bill
Moore, Richard C. Doty, and other Air Force Office of Special Investigations
(AFOSI) personnel. The sources for this information are files dating from 1981
(three years before the first alleged MJ-12 documents surfaced) that UFO
researcher Bob Pratt gave MUFON before his death in 2005. The information lay
hidden in MUFON's archives until they were digitized as part of MUFON's Pandora
Project and made available to UFO researchers. Of interest will be the
paragraph that has a handwritten date of 1/02/82 and states: "3. UFO project is
Aquarius, classified Top Secret with access restricted to MJ 12. (MJ may be
"magic"). This project begun about 1966, but apparently inherited files of
earlier project." Membership. All the alleged original members of MJ-12 were
notable for their military, government, and/or scientific achievements, and all
were deceased when the documents first surfaced (the last to die was Jerome
Hunsaker, only a few months before the MJ-12 papers first appeared). The
original composition was six civilians (mostly scientists), and six high-
ranking military officers, two from each major military service. Three (Souers,
Vandenberg, and Hillenkoetter) had been the first three heads of central
intelligence. The Moore/Shandera documents did not make clear who was the
director of MJ-12, or if there was any organizational hierarchy. According to
other sources and MJ-12 papers to emerge later, famous scientists like Robert
Oppenheimer, Albert Einstein, Karl Compton, Edward Teller, John von Neumann,
and Wernher von Braun were also allegedly involved with MJ-12.(see also
Arguments for below, particularly statements by Dr. Robert Sarbacher)
Professional and social connections among purported MJ-12 members. Research has
also shown that there were many social and professional connections among many
of the alleged members of MJ-12. For example, Bush, Hunsaker, Bronk, and
Berkner all sat on the oversight committee of the Research and Development
Board (RDB), which Bush had established and initially chaired. Other notables
on the RDB oversight committee were Karl Compton, Robert Oppenheimer, and Dr.
H. P. Robertson, who headed up the debunking Robertson Panel, of which Berkner
was a member. Various alleged MJ-12 members or participants would also
naturally be part of the Presidential office's National Security Council,
created in 1947. This would include (depending on NSC composition, which
evolved) various NSC permanent members: Executive Secretary (Souers, Cutler),
the Secretary of Defense (Forrestal), the Secretary of the Army (Gray),
National Security Advisor (Gray), and the Air Force Chief of Staff (Vandenberg,
Twining). Other nonpermanent members who would attend NSC meetings as advisors
and implement policy would be the CIA director (Hillenkoetter, Smith), the head
of the Research and Development Board (Bush, Compton), the President's Special
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Cutler, Gray), and the Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs (Twining). The purported members were trusted, high-ranking
officials who were often involved in important government projects—they
possessed diverse skills and high security clearances. However, they were not
so recognizable that they would be missed if they were to be called upon in a
secret emergency. If such a group existed, these individuals would make
plausible members. 1988 FBI investigation. The MJ-12 documents were first made
public in 1987 by Shandera, Moore, and Friedman. Another copy of the same
documents Shandera received in 1984 was mailed to British researcher Timothy
Good in 1987, again from an anonymous source. Good first reproduced them in his
book "Above Top Secret" (1988), but later judged the documents as likely
fraudulent. After the documents became widely known with the publication of
Good’s book, the Federal Bureau of Investigation then began its own
investigation, urged on by debunker Philip J. Klass. The MJ-12 documents were
supposedly classified as "Top Secret", and the FBI's initial concern was that
someone within the U.S. government had illegally leaked highly classified
information. The FBI quickly formed doubts as to the documents' authenticity.
FBI personnel contacted the U.S. Air Force Office of Special Investigations
(counterintelligence), asking if MJ-12 had ever existed. AFOSI claimed that no
such committee had ever been authorized or formed, and that the documents were
“bogus.” The FBI adopted the AFOSI opinion and declared the MJ-12 documents
to be "completely bogus.” However, when Stanton Friedman contacted the AFOSI
officer, Col. Richard Weaver, who had rendered this opinion, Friedman said
Weaver refused to document his assertion. Friedman also noted that Weaver had
taught disinformation and propaganda courses for AFOSI and was principal author
of the Air Force’s debunking Roswell report in 1994. (Friedman, 110-115)
Timothy Good in "Beyond Top Secret" also noted that Weaver in 1994 was the
Director of Security and Special Programs Oversight of AFOSI’s Pentagon
office, a very high level organization within the Office of the Secretary of
the Air Force. Good commented that AFOSI is “an agency whose work involves
counterintelligence and deception, and which has a long record of deep
involvement in the UFO problem.” Within Weaver’s office were “special
planners.” According to Good, “In Air Force parlance, the term ‘special
plans’ is a euphemism for deception as well as for ‘perception
management’ plans and operations.” Conducting an interview with one Roswell
witness, Weaver himself admitted, “We’re the people who keep the
secrets.” It is difficult to tell from interviews such as these, as the cold
war tactics of deceptions within deceptions are intentionally vague as to where
the disinformation and coverup of espionage ends and the government's actual
investigation into UFOs begins. William Moore would later reveal that the whole
New Mexico UFO disinformation scheme was run out of the Pentagon by a Colonel
Barry Hennessey of AFOSI. When the Defense Department phone directory was
checked, Hennessey was listed under the "Dept. of Special Techniques." Working
under him at the time was the same Col. Weaver. Friedman therefore raised the
question as to whether Weaver rendered an objective intelligence opinion about
the authenticity of the MJ-12 papers or was deliberately misleading the FBI as
a counterintelligence and disinformation agent, much like Doty had done with
Moore and Howe earlier. Journalist Howard Blum in his book "Out There" (1990)
further described the FBI’s difficulty in getting at the truth of the matter.
One frustrated FBI agent told Blum, “All we’re finding out is that the
government doesn’t know what it knows. There are too many secret levels. You
can’t get a straight story. It wouldn’t surprise me if we never know if the
papers are genuine or not.” Authenticity debate. Arguments against. Briefing
document and Truman letter. Skeptics argue there is strong evidence that the
briefing document and Truman letter are fake. The Cutler Memo. In addition,
although the Cutler memo was supposedly a carbon copy, it was folded as if it
had been in a shirt pocket, which would be unusual for a carbon copy put in a
file. The memo is in the National Archives; the question is how it got there,
and if it is authentic. A document entitled "SOM1-01: Extraterrestrial Entities
and Technology, Recovery and Disposal" (ref. http://209.132.68.98/pdf/
som101_part1.pdf) and found on www.majesticdocuments.com contains paragraphs
with subheads set in the sans serif "Helvetica" typeface. The document purports
to be from 1954, yet the typeface in question was first designed in 1957 by the
Swiss graphic designer, Max Miedinger. The capitalized sans serif letter "R"
(and others) found on many pages confirms that this typeface is not the much
earlier Akzidenz Grotesk sans serif typeface. This evidence seems to strongly
suggest that this document is a fabrication.
