Mexican American Mexican Americans are Americans of Mexican descent . As of
July 2011, Mexican Americans make up 10.8% of the United States' population
with over 33,558,000 Americans listed as being of full or partial Mexican
ancestry. Mexican Americans comprise 64.6% of all Hispanics and Latinos in the
United States. The United States is home to the second largest Mexican
community in the world second only to Mexico itself comprising nearly 22% of
the entire Mexican origin population of the world. Canada is a distant third
with a small but fast-growing Mexican Canadian population of 61,505 as of 2006
(compared to 37,000 as of 2001). In addition, as of 2008 there were
approximately 7,000,000 undocumented Mexicans living in the United States which
if included in the count would increase the US share to over 28% of the world's
Mexican origin population (Note that some of the undocumented would be captured
in the US Census count depending on their willingness to provide information).
Over 60% of all Mexican Americans reside in the states of California and Texas.
Most Mexican Americans are the descendants of the Indigenous peoples of Mexico
and/or Europeans, especially Spaniards. History of Mexican Americans. Mexican
American history is wide-ranging, spanning more than 400 years and varying from
region to region within the United States. In 1900, there were slightly more
than 500,000 Hispanics living in New Mexico, California and Texas. Most were
Mexican Americans of indigenous Mexican, Spanish, and other hispanicized
European settlers who arrived in the Southwest during Spanish colonial times.
Approximately ten percent of the current Mexican American population can trace
their lineage back to these early colonial settlers. As early as 1813 some of
the Tejanos who colonized Texas in the Spanish Colonial Period established a
government in Texas that looked forward to independence from Mexico. In those
days, there was no concept of what a Mexican was. Many Mexicans were more loyal
to their states/provinces than to their country as a whole. This was
particularly true in frontier regions such as Zacatecas, Texas, Yucatan,
Oaxaca, New Mexico, etc. The Mexican government became concerned by their
increasing numbers and restricted the number of new Anglo-American settlers
allowed to enter Texas. The Mexican government also banned slavery within the
state, which angered slave owners. The American settlers along with many of the
Tejanos rebelled against the centralized authority of Mexico City and the Santa
Anna regime, while others remained loyal to Mexico, and still others were
neutral. "A native of San Antonio, Juan Seguín is probably the most famous
Tejano to be involved in the War of Texas Independence. His story is complex
because he joined the Anglo rebels and helped defeat the Mexican forces of
Santa Anna. But later on, as Mayor of San Antonio, he and other Tejanos felt
the hostile encroachments of the growing Anglo power against them. After
receiving a series of death threats, Seguín relocated his family in Mexico,
where he was coerced into military service and fought against the US in
1846–1848 Mexican-American War. Although the events of 1836 led to
independence for the people of Texas, the Hispanic population of the state was
very quickly disenfranchised to the extent that their political representation
in the Texas State Legislature disappeared entirely for several decades."
Californios were Spanish speaking residents of modern day California who were
the original Hispanics (Mexicans (regardless of race) and local Hispanicized
Indians) in the region (Alta California) before the United States acquired it
as a territory. Relations between Californios and Anglo settlers were
relatively good until military officer John C. Fremont arrived in Alta
California with a force of 60 men on an exploratory expedition in 1846. Fremont
made an agreement with Comandante Castro that he would only stay in the San
Joaquin Valley for the winter, then move north to Oregon. However, Fremont
remained in the Santa Clara Valley then headed towards Monterey. When Castro
demanded that Fremont leave Alta California, Fremont rode to Gavilan Peak,
raised a US flag and vowed to fight to the last man to defend it. After three
days of tension, Fremont retreated to Oregon without a shot being fired. With
relations between Californios and Anglos quickly souring, Fremont rode back
into Alta California and encouraged a group of American settlers to seize a
group of Castro's soldiers and their horses. Another group, seized the Presidio
of Sonoma and captured Mariano Vallejo. William B. Ide was chosen Commander in
Chief and on July 5, he proclaimed the creation of the Bear Flag Republic. On
July 9, US forces reached Sonoma and lowered the Bear Flag Republic's flag then
replaced it with a US flag. Californios organized an army to defend themselves
from invading American forces after the Mexican army retreated from Alta
California to defend other parts of the country. The Californios defeated an
American force in Los Angeles on September 30, 1846, but were defeated after
the Americans reinforced their forces in what is now southern California. The
arrival of tens of thousands of people during the California Gold Rush meant
the end of the Californio's ranching lifestyle. Many Anglo 49ers turned to
farming and moved, often illegally, onto the land granted to Californios by the
old Mexican government. The United States first came into conflict with Mexico
in the 1830s, as the westward spread of Anglo settlements and of slavery
brought significant numbers of new settlers into the region known as Tejas
(modern-day Texas), then part of Mexico. The Mexican-American War, followed by
the Treaty of Guadalupe-Hidalgo in 1848 and the Gadsden Purchase in 1853,
extended U.S. control over a wide range of territory once held by Mexico,
including the present day borders of Texas and the states of New Mexico,
Colorado, Utah, Nevada, Arizona, and California. Although the treaty promised
that the landowners in this newly acquired territory would enjoy full enjoyment
and protection of their property as if they were citizens of the United States,
many former citizens of Mexico lost their land in lawsuits before state and
federal courts or as a result of legislation passed after the treaty. Even
those statutes intended to protect the owners of property at the time of the
extension of the United States' borders, such as the 1851 California Land Act,
had the effect of dispossessing Californio owners ruined by the cost of
maintaining litigation over land titles for years. While Mexican Americans were
once concentrated in the Southwest – California, Arizona, New Mexico,
Colorado and Texas – they began creating communities in St. Louis, Chicago,
Detroit, Cleveland, Pittsburgh, and other steel producing regions when they
obtained employment during World War I. More recently, Mexican illegal
immigrants have increasingly become a large part of the workforce in industries
such as meat packing throughout the Midwest, in agriculture in the southeastern
United States, and in the construction, landscaping, restaurant, hotel and
other service industries throughout the country. Mexican-American workers
formed unions of their own and joined integrated unions. The most significant
union struggle involving Mexican-Americans was the United Farm Workers' long
strike and boycott aimed at grape growers in the San Joaquin and Coachella
Valleys in the late 1960s. Its struggle propelled César Chávez and Dolores
Huerta into national prominence changing from a workers' rights organization
that helped workers get unemployment insurance to that of a union of
farmworkers almost overnight. Mexican American identity has also changed
markedly throughout these years. Over the past hundred years Mexican Americans
have campaigned for voting rights, stood against educational and employment
discrimination and stood for economic and social advancement. At the same time
many Mexican Americans have struggled with defining and maintaining their
community's identity. In the 1960s and 1970s, some Latino/Hispanic student
groups flirted with nationalism and differences over the proper name for
members of the community—Chicano/Chicana, Latino/Latina, Mexican Americans,
or Hispanics became tied up with deeper disagreements over whether to integrate
into or remain separate from mainstream American society, as well as divisions
between those Mexican Americans whose families had lived in the United States
for two or more generations and more recent immigrants. During this time rights
groups such as the National Mexican-American Anti-Defamation Committee were
founded. The states with the largest percentages and populations of Mexican-
Americans are California, Arizona, New Mexico, Texas, Colorado, Nevada, and
Utah. There has also been very high increasing populations in Oklahoma.
Pennsylvania and Illinois. Race and ethnicity. The Mexican population is mainly
conformed by Mestizos, individuals with a genetic background consisting of
Amerindian and European contributions. Genetic heterogeneity in Mexicans
results from a complex demographic history that started with the peopling of
North and Central America about 15,000 yrs ago, including the settlement of at
least 60 different indigenous groups in Mexico. Source Per the 2000 U.S.
Census, a plurality of 47.3% of Mexican Americans self identify as being of
White race, closely followed by Mexican Americans who self identify as "Some
other race", usually Mestizo (Native American/European) with 45.5%.<.
Respondents who claim two or more races accounted for 5.1%, Blacks for 0.7%,
and all other races for 1.4%. Mexican Americans are predominantly of Native
American and European descent. Mexicans are the product of the mixture of 35
ethnic groups. According to the Mexican Genome Project, the overall gene pool
of the Mexican population was calculated to be 65 percent indigenous and 35
percent non-indigenous (mostly European). According to the last Mexican census
to record race (which was in 1921), 10 percent of the Mexican populace
identified itself as white, 59 percent as Mestizo (Native American-European
mixture), 29 percent as Native American, and 2 percent as "other", foreigner
(regardless of race), or did not specify a race. Before the United States'
borders expanded westward in the 19th century, New World regions colonized by
the Spanish Empire since the 16th century held to a complex caste system
("casta") that classified persons by their fractional racial makeup and
geographic origin. For certain purposes, respondents who wrote in "Chicano" or
"Mexican" (or indeed, almost all Hispanic origin groups) in the ""Some other
race"" category were automatically re-classified into the "White race" group.
Politics and debate of racial classification. Since the 1848 Treaty of
Guadalupe Hidalgo, which granted citizenship rights to Mexican people in the
newly conquered US territory of the South West, Mexican Americans have been
legally considered "White." Since legal citizenship in the United States
required "white" racial status, new Mexican "Americans" had to be classified as
White, whether or not they were considered white in "reality". Thus Mexican
Americans were white by law, but not usually classified as such socially
(depending on class and whether an individual had any degree of perceived
indigenous ancestry). According to legal scholars, "Anglos rarely distinguished
between Mexicans and Mexican Americans and painted a picture of 'Mexicans' as
an economic and cultural threat to America. In early 1900s, Mexican Americans
increasingly were denied many of the rights of citizens. Like the African
American population, many were placed in segregated schools with inferior
educational resources, barred from restaurants, movie theaters, bathrooms, and
public swimming pools, and denied the possibility of living in white
neighborhoods," in addition to being barred from serving on juries in most of
the Southwest; yet none of this segregation was formally encoded in law. Thus
while for legal purposes, Mexican Americans were counted as White, in everyday
reality most Mexican Americans were not considered "white," did not enjoy
"white" status or privileges, and were in fact typically subjected to
systematic discrimination and "Jim Crow" style racial segregation. The legal
designation of white racial status actually worked against Mexican American
civil rights in law suits claiming racial discrimination. Such suits were
typically denied on the basis that Mexican Americans were not subject to racial
discrimination, despite all evidence to the contrary, because they were legally
white. In times and places where Mexicans were allotted white status, they were
permitted to intermarry with what today are termed "non-Hispanic whites",
though social customs typically only approved of such marriages if the Mexican
partner was not of any discernable indigenous heritage. Legally, Mexican
Americans could vote and hold elected office, though they were also constrained
from voting in most places by literacy tests and poll taxes. While Mexicans of
Spanish descent ran the state politics and constituted most of the elite of New
Mexico since colonial times, property requirements and English literacy
requirements were imposed in Arizona, California, Nevada, New Mexico, and Texas
in order to prevent Mexican Americans from voting. Some eligible voters were
intimidated with the threat of violence if they attempted to exercise their
right to vote. Mexicans were also allowed to serve in all-white units during
World War II. However, many Mexican American war veterans were discriminated
against and even denied medical services by the United States Department of
Veterans Affairs when they arrived home. In the past, Mexicans were legally
considered "White" because either they were considered to be of full Spanish
heritage, or because of early treaty obligations to Spaniards and Mexicans that
conferred citizenship status to Mexican peoples at a time when whiteness was a
prerequisite for U.S. citizenship. Although Mexican Americans were legally
classified as "White" in terms of official federal policy, many organizations,
businesses, and homeowners associations and local legal systems had official
policies to exclude Mexican Americans. Throughout the southwest discrimination
in wages were institutionalized in "white wages" versus lower "Mexican wages"
for the same job classifications. Mexican Americans legally classified as
"White", following anti-miscegenation laws in most western states until the
1960s, could not legally marry African or Asian Americans (See Perez v. Sharp).
However, most were not socially considered white, and therefore, according to
Historian Neil Foley in the book "The White Scourge" Mexicans and Mexican
Americans did marry non-whites typically without reprisal. Economic and social
issues. Immigration issues. Since the 1960s, Mexican immigrants have met a
significant portion of the demand for cheap labor in the United States. Fear of
deportation makes them highly vulnerable to exploitation by employers. Many
employers, however, have developed a "don't ask, don't tell" attitude toward
hiring undocumented Mexican nationals. In May 2006, hundreds of thousands of
undocumented immigrants, Mexicans and other nationalities, walked out of their
jobs across the country in protest to support immigration reform (many in hopes
of a path to citizenship similar to the Immigration Reform and Control Act of
1986, which granted citizenship to Mexican nationals living and working without
documentation in the US). In the United States, in states where Mexican
Americans make up a large percentage of the population, such as California and
Texas, undocumented as well as legal immigrants from Mexico and Central America
in addition to Mexican Americans combined often make up a large majority of
workers in many blue-collar occupations: the majority of the employed men are
restaurant workers, janitors, truck drivers, gardeners, construction laborers,
material moving workers, or perform other types of manual or other blue collar
labor (Source, U.S. Census Bureau, American community survey data.). Many women
also work in low wage service and retail occupations. In many of these places
with large Latino populations, many types of blue-collar workers are often
assumed to be Mexican American or Mexican or other Latino immigrants (Although
a large minority are actually not. -Source, U.S. Census Bureau, American
community survey data.) because of their frequent dominance in those
occupations and stereotyping. Occasionally, tensions have risen between Mexican
immigrants and other ethnic groups because of increasing concerns over the
availability of working-class jobs to Americans and immigrants from other
ethnic groups. However, tensions have also risen among Hispanic American
laborers who have been displaced because of both cheap Mexican labor and ethnic
profiling. African American workers in lower-wage jobs have been displaced by
undocumented Mexican laborers and their neighborhoods have been transformed
from majority black to majority Latino, which has caused some racial tensions
between African Americans and Mexicans in the Southwest US. Even legal
immigrants to the United States, both from Mexico and elsewhere, have spoken
out against illegal immigration. However, according to a survey conducted by
the Pew Research Center in June 2007, 63% of Americans would support an
immigration policy that would put illegal immigrants on a path to citizenship
if they "pass background checks, pay fines and have jobs, learn English", while
30% would oppose such a plan. The survey also found that if this program was
instead labeled "amnesty", 54% would support it, while 39% would oppose. Alan
Greenspan, former Chairman of the Federal Reserve, has said that the growth of
the working-age population is a large factor in keeping the economy growing and
that immigration can be used to grow that population. According to Greenspan,
by 2030, the growth of the US workforce will slow from 1 percent to 1/
2 percent, while the percentage of the population over 65 years will rise from
13 percent to perhaps 20 percent. Greenspan has also stated that the current
immigration problem could be solved with a "stroke of the pen", referring to
the 2007 immigration reform bill which would have strengthened border security,
created a guest worker program, and put illegal immigrants currently residing
in the US on a path to citizenship if they met certain conditions.
Discrimination and stereotypes. Throughout U.S. history, Mexican Americans have
and continue to endure various types of negative stereotypes which have long
circulated in media and popular culture. Mexican Americans have also faced
discrimination based on ethnicity, race, culture, poverty, and use of the
Spanish language. Since the majority of illegal immigrants in the U.S. have
traditionally been from Latin America, the Mexican American community has been
the subject of widespread immigration raids. During The Great Depression, the
United States government sponsored a Mexican Repatriation program which was
intended to encourage people to voluntarily move to Mexico, but thousands were
deported against their will. More than 500,000 individuals were deported,
approximately 60 percent of which were actually United States citizens. In the
post-war McCarthy era, the Justice Department launched Operation Wetback.
During World War II, more than 300,000 Mexican Americans served in the US armed
forces. Mexican Americans were generally integrated into regular military
units, however, many Mexican American war veterans were discriminated against
and even denied medical services by the United States Department of Veterans
Affairs when they arrived home. In 1948, war veteran Dr Hector P. Garcia
founded the American GI Forum to address the concerns of Mexican American
veterans who were being discriminated against. The AGIF's first campaign was on
the behalf of Felix Longoria, a Mexican American private who was killed in the
Philippines while in the line of duty. Upon the return of his body to his
hometown of Three Rivers, Texas, he was denied funeral services because of his
race. In the 1948 case of Perez v. Sharp, Andrea Perez—a Mexican-American
woman listed as White—and Sylvester Davis—an African American man—the
Supreme Court of California recognized that interracial bans on marriage
violated the Fourteenth Amendment of the Federal Constitution. In 2006, "Time"
magazine reported that the number of hate groups in the United States increased
by 33% since 2000, primarily due to anti-illegal immigrant and anti-Mexican
sentiment. According to the annual Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) Hate
Crimes Statistics Report, in 2007, Hispanics comprised 61.7 percent of victims
of crimes motivated by a bias toward the victims’ ethnicity or national
origin. Since 2003 the number of both victims of anti-Hispanic crimes and
incidents increased by nearly 40 percent. In 2004, the comparable figure was
51.5 percent. In California, the state with the largest Mexican American
population, the number of hate crimes committed against Latinos has almost
doubled. Social status and assimilation. Barrow (2005) finds increases in
average personal and household incomes for Mexican Americans in the 21st
century. U.S. born Mexican Americans earn more and are represented more in the
middle and upper-class segments more than most recently arriving Mexican
immigrants. Most immigrants from Mexico, as elsewhere, come from the lower
classes and from families generationally employed in lower skilled jobs. They
also are most likely from rural areas. Thus, many new Mexican immigrants are
not skilled in white collar professions. Recently, some professionals from
Mexico have been migrating, but to make the transition from one country to
another involves re-training and re-adjusting to conform to US laws —i.e.
professional licensing is required. According to James P. Smith of the Research
and Development Corporation, the children and grandchildren of Latino
immigrants tend to lessen educational and income gaps with native whites.
Immigrant Latino men make about half of what native whites do, while second
generation US-born Latinos make about 78 percent of the salaries of their
native white counterparts and by the third generation US-born Latinos make on
average identical wages to their US-born white counterparts. Huntington (2005)
argues that the sheer number, concentration, linguistic homogeneity, and other
characteristics of Latin American immigrants will erode the dominance of
English as a nationally unifying language, weaken the country's dominant
cultural values, and promote ethnic allegiances over a primary identification
as an American. Testing these hypotheses with data from the U.S. Census and
national and Los Angeles opinion surveys, Citrin et al. (2007) show that
Hispanics generally acquire English and lose Spanish rapidly beginning with the
second generation, and appear to be no more or less religious or committed to
the work ethic than native-born non-Mexican American whites. However, the
children and grandchildren of Mexican immigrants were able to make close ties
with their extended families in Mexico, since United States shares a 2,000 mile
border with Mexico. Many had the opportunity to visit Mexico on a relatively
frequent basis. As a result, many Mexicans were able to maintain a strong
Mexican culture, language, and relationship with others. South et al. (2005)
examine Hispanic spatial assimilation and inter-neighborhood geographic
mobility. Their longitudinal analysis of seven hundred Mexican, Puerto Rican,
and Cuban immigrants followed from 1990 to 1995 finds broad support for
hypotheses derived from the classical account of assimilation into American
society. High income, English-language use, and embeddedness in American social
contexts increased Latin American immigrants' geographic mobility into multi-
ethnic neighborhoods. US citizenship and years spent in the United States were
positively associated with geographic mobility into different neighborhoods,
and coethnic contact was inversely associated with this form of mobility, but
these associations operated largely through other predictors. Prior experiences
of ethnic discrimination increased and therefore decreased the likelihood that
Latino immigrants would move from their original neighborhoods, while residing
in metropolitan areas with large Latino populations led to geographic moves
into "less Anglo" census tracts. Segregation issues. In 2000, over nine million
Mexicans Americans lived in areas considered highly segregated socially.
Segregated neighborhoods. Neighborhoods with a high percentage of individuals
who claim Latino ancestry are commonly referred to as "barrios" or "colonias."
When translated from Spanish to English, barrio signifies "district" or
"quarter" while colonia is the corresponding Mexican Spanish word. A barrio has
been defined as "a place where Latino immigrants can express communal culture
and language within the larger American culture." In other words, the barrio is
a sort of sanctuary for Spanish-speaking immigrants who may not yet be fully
adjusted to the United States. In the barrio, they can converse in their native
language, allowing one to communicate, find a job, and seek help with less
pressure of speaking a second language. It is a place where Latino culture
thrives and a source of comfort to a recent immigrant, as it would offer him or
her a place to work and live while perfecting fluency of the English language.
However, some argue that the barrio also represents the inequality faced by
many Mexican Americans in the United States. Barrios usually offer a lower
quality of education, provide poorer jobs than other neighborhoods, and
generally receive less government attention than wealthier more integrated
Hispanic neighborhoods. Housing market practices. Studies have shown that the
segregation among Mexican Americans and Mexican immigrants seems to be
declining. One study from 1984 found that Mexican American applicants were
offered the same housing terms and conditions as Anglo Americans. They were
asked to provide the same information (regarding employment, income, credit
checks, etc.) and asked to meet the same general qualifications of their Anglo
peers. However, in this same study, it was found that Mexican Americans were
more likely than Anglo Americans to be asked to pay a security deposit or
application fee. Another interesting aspect of this study is that the Mexican
American applicants were more likely to be placed onto a waiting list than the
Anglo Americans applicants. Latino segregation versus Black segregation.
Historically, it has been portrayed that African Americans have faced much
harsher treatment concerning segregation than any other racial, ethnic, or
ancestral group. However, throughout the Southwest during the first fifty years
of the 20th century, Mexican Americans faced segregation, despite being legally
classified as "white" (The legal classification of all Mexicans as white was a
convention originally enacted to enforce the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo that
ended the Mexican American war in 1848. According to the Treaty Mexicans
remaining in the new US territory would have the right of citizens, which at
that time was only granted to "white" people.) According to legal scholar
Claire Sheridan, referring to the legal, social and political status of Mexican
Americans in the early 20th century: "Anglos rarely distinguished between
Mexicans and Mexican Americans and painted a picture of "Mexicans" as an
economic and cultural threat to America. In this period, Mexican Americans
increasingly were denied many of the rights of citizens. Like the African
American population, many were placed in segregated schools with inferior
educational resources, barred from restaurants, movie theaters, bathrooms, and
public swimming pools, and denied the possibility of living in white
neighborhoods. Yet none of this segregation was formally encoded in law. For
legal purposes, Mexican Americans were white. They were counted as white in the
census and, unlike non-whites (other than those from Africa), were able to
naturalize. However, law clashed with perceptions of racial "reality," creating
a citizenship status for Mexican Americans that many considered to be legal
fiction. This gap between their legal and social standing was reflected in
local interpretations of the law and in the regulation of their political
participation through mechanisms such as poll taxes, literacy tests, and blue
ribbon jury commissions. This unequal treatment continued through the war years
and into the 1950s. Mexican Americans' unequal status was especially evident in
their representation on juries. While not prohibited by law from serving, they
were almost universally excluded on the grounds that they were not qualified to
serve." When comparing the contemporary segregation of Mexican Americans to
that of Black Americans, some scholars claim that "Latino segregation is less
severe and fundamentally different than Black residential segregation." Some
studies suggest that contemporary segregation of Latinos is more likely to be
due to factors such as lower socioeconomic status and immigration while the
segregation of African Americans is more likely to be due to larger issues of
the history of racism in the US. Segregated schools. During certain periods,
Mexican American children sometimes were forced to register at "Mexican
schools", where classroom conditions were poor, the school year was shorter,
and the quality of education was substandard. Various reasons for the
inferiority of the education given to Mexican American students have been
listed by James A. Ferg-Cadima including: inadequate resources, poor equipment,
unfit building construction, shortened school year (see below), failure to
prevent drop out, limited access to high school, a watered down curriculum,
poor instruction, disproportionate suspension, expulsion, harassment and non-
enforced attendance rules. In 1923, the Texas Education Survey Commission found
that the school year for some non-white groups was 1.6 months shorter than the
average school year. This may be connected to the fact that minority labor was
needed during this time. As the agricultural field required the cheap labor
provided by exploited minorities, it has been suggested that the minority
school year was shortened to allow for these students to work instead of
receive the extra 1.6 months of education. Some have interpreted the shortened
school year as a "means of social control" implementing policies to ensure that
Mexican Americans would maintain the unskilled labor force required for a
strong economy. A lesser education would serve to confine Mexican Americans to
the bottom rung of the social ladder. By limiting the number of days that
Mexican Americans could attend school and allotting time for these same
students to work, in mainly agricultural and seasonal jobs, the prospects for
higher education and upward mobility were slim. Immigration and segregation.
Immigration hubs are popular destinations for Latino immigrants. They are
increasing in size and continue to be highly segregated. The largest
immigration hubs include Los Angeles, New York, and Chicago. The highly
segregated areas of these cities have historically served the purpose of
allowing immigrants to become comfortable in the United States, accumulate
wealth, and eventually leave. The historical view of immigration hubs sees
these cities as temporary starting points for immigrants. They are not expected
to live their entire lives within the United States inside segregated areas.
Rather, they are expected to accumulate enough wealth to start a life within
the larger society. This model of immigration and residential segregation,
explained above, is the model which has historically been accurate in
describing the experiences of Latino immigrants. However, the patterns of
immigration seen today no longer follows this model. This old model is termed
the standard spatial assimilation model. More contemporary models are the
polarization model and the diffusion model. The spatial assimilation model
posits that as immigrants would live within this country's borders, they would
simultaneously become more comfortable in their new surroundings, their
socioeconomic status would rise, and their ability to speak English would
increase. The combination of these changes would allow for the immigrant to
move out of the barrio and into the dominant society. This type of assimilation
reflects the experiences of immigrants of the early twentieth century. Recent,
more contemporary, models of residential segregation are the polarization model
and the diffusion model are described below. Polarization model suggests that
the immigration of non-Black minorities into the United States further
separates Blacks and Whites, as though the new immigrants are a buffer between
them. This creates a hierarchy in which Blacks are at the bottom, Whites are at
the top, and other groups fill the middle. In other words, the polarization
model posits that Asians and Amerindians are less segregated than their African
American peers because White American society would rather live closer to
Asians or Amerindians than Blacks. The diffusion model has also been suggested
as a way of describing the immigrant's experience within the United States.
This model is rooted in the belief that as time passes, more and more
immigrants enter the country. This model suggests that as the United States
becomes more populated with a more diverse set of peoples, stereotypes and
discriminatory practices will decrease, as awareness and acceptness increase.
The diffusion model predicts that new immigrants will break down old patterns
of discrimination and prejudice, as one becomes more and more comfortable with
the more diverse neighborhoods that are created through the influx of
immigrants. Applying this model to the experiences of Mexican Americans forces
one to see Mexican American immigrants as positive additions to the "American
melting pot," in which as more additions are made to the pot, the more equal
and accepting society will become. Overcrowding. The issue of overcrowding is
closely related to the issue of segregation and immigration. As immigrants
enter the country, they are likely to settle in areas where their friends,
family, or simply other who share their culture, have settled. It is not
uncommon for many members of families, extended families, or friends, to live
in what is considered "overcrowded" conditions. A large aspect of the
segregation of Latinos within the United States is overcrowding. Rates of
overcrowding among Latinos, especially in American suburbs, are high. The U.S.
Census Bureau considers a residence to be overcrowded if there is more than one
person per room There are various explanations for overcrowding. One widely
held belief about overcrowding is based on a stereotype of living in close
proximity simply to cultural preference. To expand on that point, it is widely
believed that immigrant Hispanic families live in dense households because of
their desire to remain in close proximity with extended family. However, this
view does not paint the entire picture. Some families may live under one roof
by choice and it is possible that Hispanic people may have different cultural
standards than other population groups, thus allowing them to be more
comfortable living with extended family underneath the same roof. However, one
cannot reduce all problems of Hispanic overcrowding to cultural preference, as
this offers an incomplete understanding of the issue at hand. Hispanic people
may live in overcrowded conditions out of economic necessity and simply because
they choose to live differently than others. Lack of affordable housing and a
poor selection of well-paying occupations may combine to create the necessity
of many living close together. Because one certain family may find very few
opportunities for sufficient housing or find themselves without adequate funds
for a house of their own, they may be forced to live in crowded conditions. The
Chicano movement and the Chicano Moratorium. In the heady days of the late
1960s, when the student movement was active around the globe, the Chicano
movement conducted actions such as the mass walkouts by high school students in
Denver and East Los Angeles in 1968 and the Chicano Moratorium in Los Angeles
in 1970. The movement was particularly strong at the college level, where
activists formed MEChA, an organization that seeks to promote Chicano unity and
empowerment through education and political action, but also espouses
revanchist ideals centered around "taking back" the American southwest for
Mexicans. The Chicano Moratorium, formally known as the National Chicano
Moratorium Committee, was a movement of Chicano anti-war activists that built a
broad-based but fragile coalition of Mexican-American groups to organize
opposition to the Vietnam War. The committee was led by activists from local
colleges and members of the "Brown Berets", a group with roots in the high
school student movement that staged walkouts in 1968, known as the East L.A.
walkouts, also called "blowouts". The best known historical fact of the
Moratorium was the death of Rubén Salazar, known for his reporting on civil
rights and police brutality. The official story is that Salazar was killed by a
tear gas canister fired by a member of the Los Angeles County Sheriff's
Department into the Silver Dollar Café at the conclusion of the August 29
rally. Mexican-American communities. (according to the 2010 census, L.A. is now
under 20% are of Mexican descent now with equally numerous Central American
national groups and the rest-10% other Latino). A dynamic community. In the
1990s and 2000s, the Midwestern United States became a major destination for
Mexican immigrants. But Mexican-Americans were already present in the Midwest's
industrial cities and urban areas. Especially Mexicans/Latinos came into states
like Illinois (mostly in Chicagoland), Indiana especially the Northern section,
Iowa, Kansas, Michigan (i.e. the Detroit metropolitan area), Minnesota,
Missouri, Nebraska and Wisconsin due to needs of the region's industrial
manufacturing base. Another destination of Mexican and Latin American
immigration was the Northeastern United States, in places such as the
Monongahela Valley, Pennsylvania; Mahoning Valley, Ohio; throughout
Massachusetts and the state of Rhode Island; New Haven, Connecticut along with
other Latin American nationalities; Washington, D.C. with Maryland and Northern
Virginia included; the Hudson Valley and Long Island of New York state; the
Jersey Shore region and the Delaware Valley, New Jersey. Communities that
consist mostly of recent-arrived immigrants from Mexico, are also present in
other parts of the rural Southeastern United States, in states such as Georgia,
Maryland, Tennessee, Alabama, Arkansas and Oklahoma. A growing Mexican-American
population is also present in urban areas such as Orlando, Florida with the
Central Florida region included; the Atlanta metro area; Charlotte, North
Carolina- with a majority Hispanic enclave of Eastland; New Orleans which
increased after Hurricane Katrina in Sep. 2005; the Hampton Roads, Virginia
area; the states of Maine, New Hampshire and Delaware; and Pennsylvania esp. in
the Philadelphia metropolitan area. US communities with largest population of
Mexican-Americans. The top 25 US communities with the highest populations of
Mexicans (Source: Census 2010)
