Okinawa Prefecture History. The oldest evidence of human existence in the
Ryukyu islands was discovered in Naha and Yaese. Some human bone fragments from
the Paleolithic era were unearthed, but there is no clear evidence of
Paleolithic remains. Japanese Jōmon influences are dominant in the Okinawa
Islands, although clay vessels in the Sakishima Islands have a commonality with
those in Taiwan. The first mention of the word "Ryukyu" was written in the Book
of Sui. "Okinawa" was the Japanese word depicting the islands, first seen in
the biography of Jianzhen, written in 779. Agricultural societies begun in the
8th century slowly developed until the 12th century. Since the islands are
located in the center of the East China Sea relatively close to Japan, China
and South-East Asia, the Ryūkyū Kingdom became a prosperous trading nation.
Also during this period, many Gusukus, similar to castles, were constructed.
The Ryūkyū Kingdom had a tributary relationship with the Chinese Empire
beginning in the 15th century. In 1609, the Shimazu clan, which controlled the
region that is now Kagoshima Prefecture, invaded the Ryūkyū Kingdom. The
Ryūkyū Kingdom was obliged to agree to form a tributary relationship with the
Satsuma and the Tokugawa shogunate, while maintaining its previous tributary
relationship with China; Ryukyuan sovereignty was maintained since complete
annexation would have created a conflict with China. The Satsuma clan earned
considerable profits from trades with China during a period in which foreign
trade was heavily restricted by the shogunate. Though Satsuma maintained strong
influence over the islands, the Ryūkyū Kingdom maintained a considerable
degree of domestic political freedom for over two hundred years. Four years
after the 1868 Meiji Restoration, the Japanese government, through military
incursions, officially annexed the kingdom and renamed it Ryukyu han. At the
time, the Qing Dynasty of China asserted sovereignty over the islands of the
Ryūkyū Kingdom, since the Ryūkyū Kingdom was also a tributary nation of
China. Ryukyu han became Okinawa Prefecture of Japan in 1879, even though all
other hans had become prefectures of Japan in 1872. In 1912, Okinawans first
obtained the right to vote to send representatives to the national Diet which
had been established in 1890. A quarter of the civilian population died during
the Battle of Okinawa. The dead, of all nationalities, are commemorated at the
Cornerstone of Peace. After the end of World War II in 1945, Okinawa was under
United States administration for 27 years. During the trusteeship rule the
United States Air Force established numerous military bases on the Ryukyu
islands. During the Korean War, B-29 Superfortresses flew bombing missions from
Kadena AFB over Korea and China. In 1972, the U.S. government returned the
islands to Japanese administration. Under the Treaty of Mutual Cooperation and
Security, the United States Forces Japan (USFJ) have maintained a large
military presence. 27,000 personnel, including 15,000 Marines, contingents from
the Navy, Army and Air Force, and their 22,000 family members are stationed in
Okinawa. Since 1960, the U.S. and Japan have maintained an agreement that
allows the U.S. to secretly bring nuclear weapons into Japanese ports, and
there is speculation (see below) that some nuclear weapons may be located in
Okinawa. Both tactical and strategic weapons have been maintained in Okinawa.
U.S. military bases occupied 18% of the main island and 75% of all USFJ bases
are located in Okinawa prefecture. Reports by the local media of accidents and
crimes committed by U.S. servicemen have reduced the local population's support
for the U.S. military bases. The media has also thereby drawn new interest in
the Ryukyu independence movement that developed after 1945. The rape of a 12-
year-old girl by U.S. servicemen in 1995 triggered large protests in Okinawa.
Partially as a result but also to deploy USFJ more efficiently, the U.S. and
Japanese governments agreed in 2006 to the relocation of the Marine Corps Air
Station Futenma and other minor bases. A new Japanese government that came to
power in 2009 froze the relocation plan, but in April 2010 indicated their
interest in resolving the issue by proposing a modified plan. Geography.
Cities. Okinawa Prefecture includes eleven cities. Okinawan names are in
parentheses. Towns and villages. These are the towns and villages in each
district. Natural Parks. As of March 31, 2008, 19% of the total land area of
the prefecture was designated as Natural Parks, namely the Iriomote-Ishigaki
National Park; Okinawa Kaigan and Okinawa Senseki Quasi-National Parks; and
Irabu, Kumejima, and Tonaki Prefectural Natural Parks. Fauna. Iriomote is home
to one of the world's rarest and most endangered cat species, the Iriomote Cat.
The region is also home to at least one endemic pit viper, "Trimeresurus
elegans". Coral reefs found in this region of Japan provide an environment for
a diverse marine fauna. The sea turtles return yearly to the southern islands
of Okinawa to lay their eggs. The summer months carry warnings to swimmers
regarding poisonous jellyfish and other dangerous sea creatures. Flora. Okinawa
is a major producer of sugar cane, pineapple, papaya, and other tropical fruit,
and the Southeast Botanical Gardens represent tropical plant species? Geology.
The island is largely composed of coral, and rainwater filtering through that
coral has given the island many caves, which played an important role in the
Battle of Okinawa. Gyokusendo is an extensive limestone cave in the southern
part of Okinawa's main island. Climate. The island experiences temperatures
above for most of the year. Okinawa and the many islands that make up the
prefecture contains some of the most abundant coral reefs found in the world.
Rare blue corals are found off of Ishigaki and Miyako islands as are numerous
species throughout the chain. Demography. Okinawa prefecture age pyramid as of
October 1, 2003 Okinawa Prefecture age pyramid, divided by sex, as of October
1, 2003 Language and culture. Having historically been a separate nation until
1879, Okinawan language and culture differ in many ways from that of mainland
Japan. Language. There remain numerous Ryukyuan languages which are more or
less incomprehensible to Japanese speakers. These languages are in decline as
Standard Japanese is being used by the younger generation. Many linguists, at
least those outside Japan, consider Ryukyuan languages as different languages
from Japanese, while they are generally perceived as "dialects" by mainland
Japanese and Okinawans themselves. Standard Japanese is almost always used in
formal situations. In informal situations, "de facto" everyday language among
Okinawans under age 60 is Okinawa-accented mainland Japanese ("Okinawan
Japanese"), which is often misunderstood as Okinawan language proper. The
actual traditional Okinawan language is still used in traditional cultural
activities, such as folk music, or folk dance. There is a radio news program in
the language as well. [http://www.okinawabbtv.com/news/h_news.htm] Religion.
Okinawans have traditionally followed Ryukyuan religious beliefs, generally
characterized by ancestor worship and the respecting of relationships between
the living, the dead, and the gods and spirits of the natural world. Cultural
influences. Okinawan culture bears traces of its various trading partners. One
can find Chinese, Thai and Austronesian influences in the island's customs.
Perhaps Okinawa's most famous cultural export is karate, probably a product of
the close ties with and influence of China on Okinawan culture. Karate is
thought to be a synthesis of Chinese kung fu with traditional Okinawan martial
arts. A ban on weapons in Okinawa for two long periods after the invasion and
forced annexation by Japan during the Meiji Restoration period also very likely
contributed to its development. Another traditional Okinawan product that owes
its existence to Okinawa's trading history is awamori—an Okinawan distilled
spirit made from "indica" rice imported from Thailand. Other cultural
characteristics. Other prominent examples of Okinawan culture include the
sanshin—a three-stringed Okinawan instrument, closely related to the Chinese
sanxian, and ancestor of the Japanese shamisen, somewhat similar to a banjo.
Its body is often bound with snakeskin (from pythons, imported from elsewhere
in Asia, rather than from Okinawa's venomous Trimeresurus flavoviridis, which
are too small for this purpose). Okinawan culture also features the eisa dance,
a traditional drumming dance. A traditional craft, the fabric named bingata, is
made in workshops on the main island and elsewhere. The Okinawan diet consist
of low-fat, low-salt foods, such as fish, tofu, and seaweed. Okinawans are
known for their longevity. Individuals live longer on this Japanese island than
anywhere in the world. Five times as many Okinawans live to be 100 as in the
rest of Japan, and the Japanese are the longest-lived nationality in the world.
There are 34.7 centenarians for every 100,000 inhabitants, being the highest
ratio in the world. The possible explanations to this fact is the diet, low-
stress lifestyle, caring community, activity, and spirituality of the
inhabitants of the island. In recent years, Okinawan literature has been
appreciated outside of the Ryūkyū archipelago. Two Okinawan writers have
received the Akutagawa Prize: Matayoshi Eiki in 1995 for and Medoruma Shun in
1997 for "A Drop of Water" ("Suiteki"). The prize was also won by Okinawans in
1967 by Tatsuhiro Oshiro for "Cocktail Party" ("Kakuteru Pāti") and in 1971 by
Mineo Higashi for "Okinawan Boy" ("Okinawa no Shōnen"). Karate. Karate
originated in Okinawa. Over time, it developed into several styles and sub-
styles. On Okinawa, the three main styles are considered to be Shorin-Ryu,
Goju-Ryu and Uechi-Ryu. Internationally, the various styles and sub-styles
include Wado Ryu, Shorin-Ryu, Uechi Ryu, Goju Ryu, Shotokan, Isshin-Ryu, Shito-
Ryu, Shorinjiryu Kenkokan, Shorinjiryu Koshinkai, Shorinji Ryu, Shuri-ryū, and
Pangai-noon. Architecture. Despite widespread destruction during the war, there
are many remains of a unique type of castle or fortress known as "gusuku"; the
most significant are now inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage List (Gusuku
Sites and Related Properties of the Kingdom of Ryukyu). In addition, and
thirty-six historic sites have been designated for protection by the national
government. Whereas most homes in Japan are made with wood and allow free-flow
of air to combat humidity, typical modern homes in Okinawa are made from
concrete with barred windows (protection from flying plant matter) to deal with
regular typhoons. Roofs are also designed with strong winds in mind, with each
tile cemented on and not merely layered as seen with many homes elsewhere in
Japan. Many roofs also display a statue resembling a lion or dragon, called a
"shisa", which is said to protect the home from danger. Roofs are typically red
in color and are inspired by Chinese design. Okinawa during the Vietnam War.
Between 1965 and 1972, Okinawa was a key staging point for the United States,
in its military operations directed towards North Vietnam. Okinawa, along with
Guam, also presented the United States military a geographically strategic
launch pad for covert bombing missions over Cambodia and Laos. Anti-Vietnam War
sentiment became linked politically to the movement for reversion of Okinawa to
Japan. Political leaders such as Oda Makoto, a major figure in the Beheiren
movement (Foundation of Citizens for Peace in Vietnam), believed that the
return of Okinawa to Japan would lead to the removal of U.S forces ending
Japan's involvement in Vietnam. In a speech delivered in 1967 Oda was critical
of Prime Minister Sato’s unilateral support of America’s War in Vietnam
claiming "Realistically we are all guilty of complicity in the Vietnam War". In
1965, the United States military bases, earlier viewed as paternal post war
protection, were increasingly seen as aggressive. The military build up on the
island during the Cold War increased a division between local inhabitants and
the American military. The Vietnam War highlighted the differences between the
United States and Okinawa, but showed a commonality between the islands and
mainland Japan. The United States military bases on Okinawa became a focal
point for anti-Vietnam War sentiment. By 1969, over 50,000 American military
personnel were stationed on Okinawa, accustomed to privileges and laws not
shared by the indigenous population. The United States Department of Defense
began referring to Okinawa as "The Keystone of the Pacific". This idea was even
stated on U.S military license plates. As controversy grew regarding the
alleged placement of nuclear weapons on Okinawa, fears intensified on the
possible escalation of the Vietnam War. Okinawa was then perceived, by some
inside Japan, as a potential target for China, should the communist government
feel threatened by the United States. American military secrecy blocked any
local reporting on what was actually occurring at such bases as Kadena Air
Base. But as information leaked out, and images of air strikes were published,
the local population began to fear the potential for retaliation. The Beheiren
became a more visible protest movement on Okinawa as the American involvement
in Vietnam intensified. The anti-war movement employed tactics ranging from
demonstrations, to handing leaflets to soldiers, sailors, airmen and Marines
directly, warning of the implications for a third World War. The Vietnam War
forced many Okinawans to address their own recent history, in particular the
destruction wrought by the battle of Okinawa in World War II. Images of
devastation in Vietnam, by planes based and armed in Okinawa, led many to see
parallels in the two wars. This sympathy for a fellow Asian nation only
increased public outrage, and calls for a return to what Okinawans called
"Absolute Pacifism". U.S. military controversy. The United States maintains Air
Force, Marine, Navy, and Army military installations on the islands. These
bases include Kadena Air Base, Camp Foster, Marine Corps Air Station Futenma,
Camp Hansen, Camp Schwab, Torii Station, and Camp Kinser. The area of 14 U.S.
bases are , occupying 18% of the main island. Okinawa hosts about two-thirds of
the 40,000 American forces in Japan. The islands account for less than one
percent of total lands in Japan. Suburbs have grown towards and now surround
two historic major bases, Futenma and Kadena. One third () of the land used by
the U.S. military is the Marine Corps Northern Training Area in the north of
the island. Between 1972 and 2009, there were 5,634 criminal offenses committed
by US servicemen, including 25 murders, 385 burglaries, 25 arsons, 127 rapes,
306 assaults and 2,827 thefts. In early 2008, US secretary of state Condoleezza
Rice apologized after a series of crimes involving American troops in Japan,
including the rape of a young girl of 14 by a Marine on Okinawa. The U.S.
military also imposed a temporary 24-hour curfew on military personnel and
their families to ease the anger of local residents. Some cited statistics that
the crime rate of military personnel is consistently less than that of the
general Okinawan population. However, some criticized the statistics as
unreliable since Japanese violence against Japanese women is especially under-
reported. According to a 2007 "Okinawa Times" poll, 85% of Okinawans opposed
the presence of the U.S. military, due to noise pollution from military drills,
the risk of aircraft accidents, environmental degradation, and extra crowding
from the number of personnel there, although 73.4% of Japanese citizens
appreciated the mutual security treaty with the U.S. and the presence of the
USFJ. In another poll conducted by the "Asahi Shimbun" in May 2010, 43% of the
population wanted the complete closure of the U.S. bases, 42% wanted reduction
and 11% wanted the maintenance of the status quo. The Okinawan prefectural
government and local municipalities have made various withdrawal demands of the
U.S. military since the end of WWII, but local governments have no right to
conduct affairs of state with a foreign power. Therefore, no fundamental
solution has ever been undertaken by either the Japanese or U.S. governments,
although a detailed plan exists. U.S. nuclear arms base. The Japanese tended to
oppose the introduction of nuclear arms into Japanese territory by the
government's assertion of non-nuclear policy and a statement of the Three Non-
Nuclear Principles. Most of the weapons were alleged to be stored in ammunition
bunkers at Kadena Air Base. Between 1954 and 1972, 19 different types of
nuclear weapons were deployed in Okinawa, but with less than around 1,000
warheads at any one time. It is widely speculated that not all the supposed
weapons were removed from Okinawa. In an interview with the "Mainichi Shimbun"
in 1981, Edwin O. Reischauer, former U.S. ambassador to Japan, said that U.S.
naval ships armed with nukes stopped at Japanese ports on a routine duty and
this was approved by the Japanese government. MCAS Futenma relocation. The
governments of the United States and Japan agreed on October 26, 2005 to move
Marine Corps Air Station Futenma from its location in the densely populated
city of Ginowan to the more northerly and remote Camp Schwab. Under the plan,
thousands of Marines will relocate. The move is partly an attempt to relieve
tensions between the people of Okinawa and the Marine Corps. Protests from
environmental groups and residents over the construction of part of a runway at
Camp Schwab, and from businessmen and politicians around Futenma and Henoko,
have occurred. The legality of the proposed heliport relocation has been
questioned as being a violation of International Law, including the World
Heritage Convention, the Convention on Biological Diversity and the Convention
for the Safeguarding of Intangible Cultural Heritage. Proposed solutions. As
recently as 2003, the U.S. was considering moving most of the 20,000 Marines on
Okinawa to new bases that would be established in Australia; increasing the
presence of U.S. troops in Singapore and Malaysia; and seeking agreements to
base Navy ships in Vietnamese waters and ground troops in the Philippines. As
of 2006, some 8,000 U.S. Marines were being removed from the island and being
relocated to Guam. In November 2008, U.S. Pacific Command Commander Admiral
Timothy Keating stated that the move to Guam would probably not be completed
before 2015. Japan's former foreign minister Katsuya Okada stated that he
wanted to review the deployment of U.S. troops in Japan to ease the burden on
the people of Okinawa, where many U.S. bases are located, the Associated Press
reported October 7, 2009. 5,000 Marines of 9,000 Marines will be deployed at
Guam and the rest will be deployed at Hawaii and Australia. Japan will pay $3.1
billion cash for the moving and for developing joint training ranges on Guam
and on Tinian and Pagan in the U.S.-controlled Northern Mariana Islands.
Education. The public schools in Okinawa are overseen by the Okinawa
Prefectural Board of Education. The agency directly operates several public
high schools. The U.S. Department of Defense Dependents Schools (DoDDS)
operates 13 schools total in Okinawa. Seven of these schools are located on
Kadena Air Base. Okinawa has many types of private schools. Some of them are
cram schools, also known as juku. Others, such as Nova, solely teach language.
People also attend small language schools. Japanese language schools for
foreigners are also becoming popular in Okinawa. There are 10 colleges/
universities in Okinawa including the Asian Division of University of Maryland
University College (UMUC). Starting in September 2012, the Okinawa Institute of
Science and Technology – which also conducts all research and education in
English and has a faculty and student body which is over half non-Japanese –
will offer a PhD program in cross-disciplinary science. Sports. Association
football Basketball Handball In addition, various baseball teams hold training
during the winter in the prefecture as it is the warmest prefecture of Japan
with no snow and higher temperatures than other prefectures. There are numerous
golf courses in the prefecture, and there was formerly a professional
tournament called the Okinawa Open. Economy. The United States has a number of
bases on Okinawa which are financially supported by the U.S. and Japan. They
provide jobs for Okinawans, both directly and indirectly. However they account
for 4 or 5% of the economy nowadays. In 2012, the US military employed 4,000
Japanese workers directly. It contributed $1.9 billion to the local economy.
