Operation Wetback Operation Wetback was a 1954 operation by the United States
Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) to remove illegal immigrants,
mostly Mexican nationals from the southwestern United States. History.
Burgeoning numbers of Mexican migrants prompted President Dwight D. Eisenhower
to appoint General Joseph Swing as INS Commissioner. According to Attorney
General Herbert Brownell, Jr., Eisenhower had a sense of urgency about illegal
immigration upon taking office. In a letter to Senator J. William Fulbright,
Eisenhower quoted a report in "The New York Times" that said, "The rise in
illegal border-crossing by Mexican 'wetbacks' to a current rate of more than
1,000,000 cases a year has been accompanied by a curious relaxation in ethical
standards extending all the way from the farmer-exploiters of this contraband
labor to the highest levels of the Federal Government." Operation Wetback in
action. The effort began in California and Arizona in 1954 and coordinated
1,075 Border Patrol agents, along with state and local police agencies. Tactics
employed included going house to house in Mexican-American neighborhoods and
citizenship checks during standard traffic stops. Some 750 agents targeted
agricultural areas with a goal of 1,000 apprehensions per day. By the end of
July, over 50,000 illegal aliens were caught in the two states. An estimated
488,000 illegal aliens are believed to have left voluntarily, for fear of being
apprehended. By September, 80,000 had been taken into custody in Texas, and the
INS estimated that 500,000 to 700,000 had left Texas of their own accord. To
discourage illicit re-entry, buses and trains took many deportees deep within
Mexican territory before releasing them. Tens of thousands more were deported
by two chartered ships: the "Emancipation" and the "Mercurio". The ships
ferried them from Port Isabel, Texas, to Veracruz, Mexico, more than to the
south. Some were taken as far as . Deportation by sea was ended after seven
deportees jumped overboard from the "Mercurio" and drowned, provoking a mutiny
that led to a public outcry in Mexico. Civil rights violations. There were
widespread allegations of abuse against Mexicans and US citizens of Mexican
descent, including harassment and beatings.
