Political radicalism The term political radicalism (or simply, in political
science, radicalism) denotes political principles focused on altering social
structures through revolutionary means and changing value systems in
fundamental ways. Derived from the Latin "radix" (root), the denotation of
radical has changed since its eighteenth-century coinage to comprehend the
entire political spectrum—yet retains the “change at the root”
connotation fundamental to revolutionary societal change. Historically,
radicalism has referred exclusively to the "radical left", under the single
category of far-left politics, rarely incorporating far-right politics though
these may have revolutionary elements; the prominent exception is in the United
States where some consider radicalism to include both political extremes of the
radical left and the "radical right". In traditional labels of the spectrum of
political thought, the opposite of radical on the "right" of the political
spectrum is termed reactionary. The nineteenth-century "Cyclopaedia of
Political Science" (1881, 1889) reports that "radicalism is characterized less
by its principles than by the manner of their application". Conservatives often
used the term "radical" pejoratively, whereas contemporary left radicals used
the term "conservative" derogatorily; thus contemporary denotations of
"radical", "radicalism", and "political radicalism" comprehend far left,
radical left, and far right (radical right). The "Encyclopædia Britannica"
records the first political usage of "radical" as ascribed to the British Whig
Party parliamentarian Charles James Fox, who, in 1797, proposed a “radical
reform” of the electoral system franchise to provide universal manhood
suffrage, thereby, idiomatically establishing "radical" to denote supporters of
the reformation of the British Parliament. Throughout the nineteenth century,
the term was combined with political notions and doctrines, thus working class
radicalism, middle class-, philosophic-, democratic- bourgeois-, Tory-, and
plebeian radicalism. In the event, politically-influential radical leaders give
rise to their own trend of political radicalism, e.g. Spencean radicalism and
Carlilean radicalism. Philosophically, the French political scientist Jean-
Jacques Rousseau (1712–78), is the principal theoretician proposing
"political radicalism" as feasible in republican political philosophy, "viz"
the French Revolution (1789–99), and other modern revolutions—the
antithesis to the liberalism of John Locke.
