Roswell UFO incident The Roswell UFO Incident, also known simply as Roswell,
was a report of an object that crashed near Roswell, New Mexico, in June or
July 1947, allegedly an extra-terrestrial spacecraft and its alien occupants.
Since the late 1970s the incident has been the subject of intense controversy
and several conspiracy theories as to the true nature of the object that
crashed. The United States Armed Forces maintains that what was recovered was
debris from an experimental high-altitude surveillance balloon belonging to a
classified program named "Mogul"; many UFO proponents maintain that an alien
craft was found and its occupants were captured, and that the military then
engaged in a cover-up. The incident has turned into a widely known pop culture
phenomenon, making the name Roswell synonymous with UFOs. It is the most
publicized and controversial of alleged UFO incidents. On July 8, 1947, the
Roswell Army Air Field (RAAF) public information officer Walter Haut in
Roswell, New Mexico, issued a press release stating that personnel from the
field's 509th Bomb Group had recovered a crashed "flying disk" from a ranch
near Roswell, sparking intense media interest. The next day, the press reported
that Commanding General of the Eighth Air Force Roger M. Ramey stated that, in
fact, a radar-tracking balloon had been recovered by the RAAF personnel, not a
"flying disc." A subsequent press conference was called, featuring debris said
to be from the crashed object, which seemed to confirm the weather balloon
description. The incident was forgotten and almost completely ignored, even by
UFO researchers, for more than 30 years. Then, in 1978, physicist and ufologist
Stanton T. Friedman interviewed Major Jesse Marcel who was involved with the
original recovery of the debris in 1947. Marcel expressed his belief that the
military had covered up the recovery of an alien spacecraft. His story spread
through UFO circles, being featured in some UFO documentaries at the time. In
February 1980, "The National Enquirer" ran its own interview with Marcel,
garnering national and worldwide attention for the Roswell incident. Additional
witnesses added significant new details, including claims of a huge military
operation dedicated to recovering alien craft and aliens themselves, at as many
as 11 crash sites, and alleged witness intimidation. In 1989, former mortician
Glenn Dennis put forth a detailed personal account, wherein he claimed that
alien autopsies were carried out at the Roswell base. In response to these
reports, and after congressional inquiries, the General Accounting Office
launched an inquiry and directed the Office of the Secretary of the Air Force
to conduct an internal investigation. The result was summarized in two reports.
The first, released in 1995, concluded that the reported recovered material in
1947 was likely debris from a secret government program called Project Mogul,
which involved high altitude balloons meant to detect sound waves generated by
Soviet atomic bomb tests and ballistic missiles. The second report, released in
1997, concluded that reports of recovered alien bodies were likely a
combination of innocently transformed memories of military accidents involving
injured or killed personnel, innocently transformed memories of the recovery of
anthropomorphic dummies in military programs like Project High Dive conducted
in the 1950s, and hoaxes perpetrated by various witnesses and UFO proponents.
The psychological effects of time compression and confusion about when events
occurred explained the discrepancy with the years in question. These reports
were dismissed by UFO proponents as being either disinformation or simply
implausible. However, numerous high-profile UFO researchers discount the
possibility that the incident had anything to do with aliens. Contemporary
accounts of materials found. On June 14, 1947, William Ware "Mack" or "Mac"
Brazel noticed some strange clusters of debris while working on the Foster
homestead, where he was foreman, some north of Roswell. This date (or "about
three weeks" before July 8) appeared in later stories featuring Brazel, but the
initial press release from the Roswell Army Air Field said the find was
"sometime last week," suggesting Brazel found the debris in early July. Brazel
told the Roswell Daily Record that he and his son saw a "large area of bright
wreckage made up of rubber strips, tinfoil, a rather tough paper and sticks."
He paid little attention to it but returned on July 4 with his son, wife and
daughter to gather up the material. Some accounts have described Brazel as
having gathered some of the material earlier, rolling it together and stashing
it under some brush. The next day, Brazel heard reports about "flying discs"
and wondered if that was what he had picked up. On July 7, Brazel saw Sheriff
Wilcox and "whispered kinda confidential like" that he may have found a flying
disc. Another account quotes Wilcox as saying that Brazel reported the object
on July 6. Sheriff Wilcox called Roswell Army Air Field. Major Jesse Marcel and
a "man in plainclothes" accompanied Brazel back to the ranch where more pieces
were picked up. "spent a couple of hours Monday afternoon [July 7 looking for
any more parts of the weather device", said Marcel. "We found a few more
patches of tinfoil and rubber." As described in the July 9, 1947, edition of
the "Roswell Daily Record", Colonel William H. Blanchard, commanding officer of
the 509th, contacted General Roger M. Ramey of the Eighth Air Force in Fort
Worth, Texas, and Ramey ordered the object be flown to Fort Worth Army Air
Field. At the base, Warrant Officer Irving Newton confirmed Ramey’s
preliminary opinion, identifying the object as being a weather balloon and its
"kite," a nickname for a radar reflector used to track the balloons from the
ground. Another news release was issued, this time from the Fort Worth base,
describing the object as being a "weather balloon". In Fort Worth, several news
photographs were taken that day of debris said to be from the object. Witness
accounts emerge. New witness accounts and the emergence of alien narratives. In
1978, nuclear physicist and author Stanton T. Friedman interviewed Jesse
Marcel, the only person known to have accompanied the Roswell debris from where
it was recovered to Fort Worth where reporters saw material said to be part of
the recovered object. Over the next few years, the accounts he and others gave
elevated Roswell from a forgotten incident to perhaps the most famous UFO case
of all time. By the early 1990s, UFO researchers such as Friedman, William
Moore, Karl T. Pflock, and the team of Kevin D. Randle and Donald R. Schmitt
had interviewed several hundred people who had, or claimed to have had, a
connection with the events at Roswell in 1947. Additionally, hundreds of
documents were obtained via Freedom of Information Act requests, as were some
apparently leaked by insiders, such as the disputed "Majestic 12" documents.
Their conclusions were that at least one alien craft had crashed in the Roswell
vicinity, that aliens, some possibly still alive, were recovered, and that a
massive cover-up of any knowledge of the incident was put in place. Numerous
books, articles, television specials and even a made-for-TV movie brought the
1947 incident fame and notoriety so that by the mid-1990s, strong majorities in
polls, such as a 1997 CNN/"Time" poll, believed that aliens had visited earth
and specifically that aliens had landed at Roswell and the government was
covering up the fact. A new narrative emerged, which was at strong odds with
what was reported in 1947. This narrative evolved over the years from the time
the first book on Roswell was published in 1980 as many new witnesses and
accounts emerged, drawn out in part by publicity on the incident. Though
skeptics had many objections to the plausibility of these accounts, it was not
until 1994 and the publication of the first Air Force report on the incident
that a strong counter-argument to the presence of aliens was widely publicized.
Numerous scenarios emerged from these authors as to what they felt were the
true sequence of events, depending on which witness accounts were embraced or
dismissed, and what the documentary evidence suggested. This was especially
true in regards to the various claimed crash and recovery sites of alien craft,
as various authors had different witnesses and different locations for these
events. What follows is accounts of the sequence of events according to some of
the major books published on the subject. "The Roswell Incident" (1980). The
first book on the subject, "The Roswell Incident" by Charles Berlitz and
William L. Moore, was published in 1980. The authors at the time said they had
interviewed more than ninety witnesses. Though uncredited, Stanton Friedman did
substantial research for the book. The book featured accounts of debris
described by Jesse Marcel as "nothing made on this earth." Additional accounts
suggested that the material Marcel recovered had super-strength and other
attributes not associated with anything known of terrestrial origin, and
certainly not anything associated with a "weather balloon" which was the
official description of the object. The book also introduced the contention
that debris recovered by Marcel at the Foster ranch (visible in photographs
showing Marcel posing with the debris) was substituted for debris from a
weather device (visible in pictures with Gen. Ramey, Marcel and others) as part
of a cover-up. The actual debris recovered from the ranch—which, the authors
claimed, was from a crashed UFO—was not permitted a close inspection by the
press. Also described were efforts by the military to discredit and "counteract
the growing hysteria towards flying saucers". Additionally, various accounts of
witness intimidation were included, in particular reports of the incarceration
of Mac Brazel, who reported the debris in the first place. (These reports came
from relatives and others as Brazel had died years earlier.) A report of
Roswell residents Dan Wilmot and his wife seeing an object "like two inverted
saucers faced mouth to mouth" passing overhead on the evening of July 2 was
included, as were other reports of mysterious objects seen flying overhead. The
book also introduced an alien account by Barney Barnett who had died years
earlier. Friends said he had on numerous occasions described the crash of a
flying saucer and the recovery of alien corpses in the Socorro area, about west
of the Foster ranch. He and a group of archaeologists who happened to be in the
vicinity had stumbled upon an alien craft and its occupants on the morning of
July 3, only to be led away by military personnel. Further accounts suggested
that these aliens and their craft were shipped to Edwards Air Force Base (known
then as Muroc Army Air Field) in California. The book suggested that either
there were two crafts that crashed, or debris from the vehicle Barnett had
described had landed on the Foster ranch after an explosion. Marcel said he
"heard about it on July 7" when the sheriff whom Brazel had called him, but
also said that " Sunday, July 6, Brazel decided he had better go into town and
report this to someone," who in turn called Marcel, suggesting, though not
stating, that he was contacted July 6. In 1947, Marcel was quoted as saying he
visited the ranch on Monday, July 7. Marcel described returning to Roswell the
evening of July 7 to find that news of the discovery of a flying disc had
leaked out. Calls were made to his house, including a visit from a reporter,
but he would not confirm the reports for the press. "The next morning, that
written press release went out, and after that things really hit the fan." The
book suggested that the military orchestrated Brazel's testimony to make it
appear a mundane object had landed on the ranch, though the book did not
explicitly say that the military instructed Brazel to give a mid-June date for
his discovery. "Brazel... to great pains to tell the newspaper people exactly
what the Air Force had instructed him to say regarding how he had come to
discover the wreckage and what it looked like ..." "UFO Crash at Roswell"
(1991). In 1991, with the benefit of a decade of publicity on the incident and
numerous new witness interviews, Kevin D. Randle and Donald R. Schmitt
published "UFO Crash at Roswell". Timelines were slightly altered. The date
that Brazel reported the debris and Marcel went to the ranch was said to be
Sunday, July 6, not the next day as some of the original accounts suggested,
and "The Roswell Incident" had left unclear. Additionally, Marcel and an
unidentified counter-intelligence agent spent the night at the ranch, something
not mentioned previously. They gathered material on Monday, then Marcel dropped
by his house on the way to the Roswell base in the early hours of Tuesday, July
8. Significant new details emerged, including accounts of a "gouge... that
extended four or five hundred feet" at the ranch and descriptions of an
elaborate cordon and recovery operation. (Several witnesses in "The Roswell
Incident" described being turned back from the Foster ranch by armed military
police, but more extensive descriptions were lacking.) The Barnett accounts
were mentioned, though the dates and locations were changed from the accounts
found in "The Roswell Incident". In this new account, Brazel is described as
leading the Army to a second crash site on the ranch, where the Army was
"horrified to find civilians Barnett there already." New witness accounts added
substantially to the reports of aliens and their recovery. Glenn Dennis had
emerged as an important witness after calling the hotline when an episode of
“Unsolved Mysteries” featured the Roswell incident in 1989. His
descriptions of Roswell alien autopsies were the first to place alien corpses
at the Roswell Army Air Base. No mention, except in passing, was made of the
claim found in "The Roswell Incident" that the Roswell aliens and their craft
were shipped to Edwards Air Force Base. The book established a chain of events
with alien corpses seen at a crash site, their bodies shipped to the Roswell
base as witnessed by Dennis, and then flown to Fort Worth and finally to Wright
Field in Dayton, Ohio, the last known location of the bodies (accounts
assembled in part from the testimony of Frank Kaufmann and Capt. O. W.
Henderson). "Crash at Corona" (1992). In 1992, "Crash at Corona", written by
Stanton Friedman and Don Berliner, suggested a high-level cover-up of a UFO
recovery, based on documents they obtained such as the Majestic 12 archive.
These documents were anonymously dropped off at a UFO researcher’s house in
1984 and purported to be 1952 briefing papers for incoming President Dwight
Eisenhower describing a high-level government agency whose purpose was to
investigate aliens recovered at Roswell and to keep such information hidden
from public view. Friedman had done much of the research for "The Roswell
Incident" with William Moore, and "Crash at Corona" built on that research. The
title contains Corona instead of Roswell as Corona is geographically closer to
the Foster ranch crash site. The time-line is largely the same as previously,
with Marcel and Sheridan Cavitt, a counter-intelligence agent who was likely
the "man in plainclothes" described by Brazel in 1947, visiting the ranch on
Sunday, July 6. But the book says that Brazel was "taken into custody for about
a week" and escorted into the offices of the Roswell Daily Record on July 10
where he gave an account he was told to give by the government. A sign of the
disputes between various researchers is on display as Friedman and Berliner
move the Barnett account back to near Socorro and introduce a new eyewitness
account of the site from Gerald Anderson who provided vivid descriptions of
both a downed alien craft and four aliens, of which at least one was alive. The
authors note that much of their evidence had been dismissed by "UFO Crash at
Roswell" "without a solid basis" and that "a personality conflict between
Anderson and Randle" meant that Friedman was the author who investigated his
claim. The book, however, largely embraces the sequence of events from "UFO
Crash at Roswell", where aliens are seen at the Roswell Army Air Field, based
on the Dennis account, and then shipped off to Fort Worth and then Wright
Field. The book suggests as many as eight alien corpses were recovered from two
crash sites: three dead and perhaps one alive from the Foster ranch, and three
dead and one living from the Socorro site. "The Truth about the UFO Crash at
Roswell" (1994). In 1994, Randle and Schmitt published a second book, "The
Truth about the UFO Crash at Roswell". while restating much of the case as laid
out in their earlier book, new and expanded accounts of aliens were included,
and a new location for the recovery of aliens was detailed. Additionally, an
almost completely new scenario as to the sequence of events was laid out. For
the first time, the object was said to have crashed on the evening of Friday,
July 4 instead of Wednesday July 2, the date in all the previous books. Another
important difference was the assertion that the alien recovery was well under
way before Brazel went into Roswell with his news about debris on the Foster
ranch. Indeed, several objects had been tracked by radar for a few days in the
vicinity before one crashed. In all previous accounts, the military was made
aware of the alleged alien crash only when Brazel came forward. Additionally,
Brazel was said to have given his news conference on July 9, and his press
conference and the initial news release announcing the discovery of a "flying
disc" were all part of an elaborate ruse to shift attention away from the
"true" crash site. The book featured a new witness account describing an alien
craft and aliens from Jim Ragsdale, at a new location just north of Roswell,
instead of closer to Corona on the Foster ranch. Corroboration was given by
accounts from a group of archaeologists. Five alien corpses were seen. While
the Foster ranch was a source of debris as well, no bodies were recovered
there. Expanded accounts came from Dennis and Kaufmann. And a new account from
Ruben Anaya described New Mexico Lieutenant Governor Joseph Montoya's claim
that he saw alien corpses at the Roswell base. More disagreement between
Roswell researchers is on display in the book. A full chapter is devoted to
dismissing the Barnett and Anderson accounts from Socorro, a central part of
"Crash at Corona" and "The Roswell Incident". "...Barnett's story, and in fact,
the Plains San Augustin, near Soccoro scenario, must be discarded", say the
authors. An appendix is devoted to describing the Majestic 12 documents,
another central part of "Crash at Corona", as a hoax. The two Randle and
Schmitt books remain highly influential in the UFO community, their interviews
and conclusions widely reproduced on websites. Randle and Schmitt claimed to
have "conducted more than two thousand interviews with more than five hundred
people" during their Roswell investigations. UFO community schism. By the
publication of "The Truth About the UFO Crash at Roswell" in 1994, a serious
split had emerged within the UFO community as to the true sequence of the
events and the locations of the alleged alien crash sites. The Center for UFO
Studies (CUFOS) and the Mutual UFO Network (MUFON), two leading UFO societies,
were at odds over the various scenarios presented by Randle/Schmitt and
Friedman/Berliner, so much so that several conferences were held to try to
resolve the differences. One of the issues under discussion was where,
precisely, Barnett was when he saw the alien craft he was said to have
encountered. A 1992 conference tried to achieve a consensus among the various
scenarios as portrayed in "Crash at Corona" and "UFO Crash at Roswell", but the
publication of "The Truth About the UFO Crash at Roswell" in 1994 "resolved"
the Barnett problem by simply ignoring him and citing a new location for the
alien craft recovery, including a new group of archaeologists not connected to
the ones the Barnett story cited. "Alien autopsy" footage. Film footage claimed
to have been taken by a U.S. military official shortly after the Roswell
incident, and purportedly showing an alien autopsy, was released in 1995 by Ray
Santilli, a London-based video entrepreneur. The footage caused an
international sensation when it aired on television networks around the world.
In 2006, Santilli admitted that the film was mostly a reconstruction but
continued to claim that it was based on genuine footage now lost, and that some
frames from the original remained. The story was retold in the comedy film
"Alien Autopsy", released in 2006. Air Force and skeptics respond to alien
reports. Air Force reports on the Roswell UFO incident. In the mid-1990s, the
United States Air Force issued two reports that, they said, accounted for the
debris found and reported on in 1947, and that also accounted for the later
reports of alien recoveries. The reports identified the debris as coming from a
top secret government experiment called Project Mogul, which tested the
feasibility of detecting Soviet nuclear tests and ballistic missiles with
equipment on high-altitude balloons. Accounts of aliens were explained as
resulting from misidentified military experiments that used anthropomorphic
dummies, accidents involving injured or killed military personnel, and hoaxes
perpetrated by various witnesses and UFO proponents. The Air Force report
formed a basis for a skeptical response to the claims many authors were making
about the recovery of aliens, though skeptical researchers such as Philip J.
Klass and Robert Todd had already been publishing articles for several years
raising doubts about alien accounts before the Air Force issued its
conclusions. While books published into the 1990s suggested there was much more
to the Roswell incident than the mere recovery of a weather balloon, skeptics,
and even some social anthropologists instead saw the increasingly elaborate
accounts as evidence of a myth being constructed. After the release of the Air
Force reports in the mid-1990s, several books, such as Kal K. Korff's "The
Roswell UFO Crash: What They Don't Want You To Know", published in 1997, built
on the evidence presented in the reports to conclude "there is no credible
evidence that the remains of an extraterrestrial spacecraft was involved."
Problems with witness accounts. Hundreds of witnesses were interviewed by the
various researchers, a seemingly impressive figure, but a comparable few were
true "witnesses" who claimed to have actually seen debris or aliens, critics
point out. Most "witnesses" were in fact repeating the claims of others, and
their testimony would be inadmissible hearsay in an American court, says Korff.
Of the 90 witnesses claimed to have been interviewed for "The Roswell
Incident", says Korff, the testimony of only 25 appear in the book, and only
seven actually saw the debris. Of these, five handled the debris. Karl T.
Pflock, in his 2001 book "Roswell: Inconvenient Facts and the Will to Believe",
makes a similar point about Randle and Schmitt's "UFO Crash at Roswell." Some
271 people are listed in the book who were "contacted and interviewed" for the
book, and this number does not include those who chose to remain anonymous,
etc., meaning more than 300 "witnesses" were interviewed, a figure Pflock said
the authors frequently cited. Of these 300-plus individuals, said Pflock, only
41 can be "considered genuine first- or second-hand witnesses to the events in
and around Roswell or at the Fort Worth Army Air Field," and only 23 can be
"reasonably thought to have seen physical evidence, debris recovered from the
Foster Ranch." Of these, said Pflock, only seven have asserted anything
suggestive of otherworldly origins for the debris. As for the several accounts
from those who claimed to have seen aliens, critics identified problems with
these accounts ranging from the reliability of second-hand accounts (Pappy
Henderson, General Exon, etc.), to serious credibility problems with witnesses
making demonstrably false claims or multiple, contradictory accounts (Gerald
Anderson, Glenn Dennis, Frank Kaufmann, Jim Ragsdale), to dubious death-bed
"confessions" or accounts from elderly and easily confused witnesses (Maj.
Edwin Easley, Lewis Rickett). Pflock, writing in 2001, noted that only four
people with firsthand knowledge of alien bodies were interviewed and identified
by Roswell authors: Frank Kaufmann; Jim Ragsdale; Lt. Col. Albert Lovejoy
Duran; Gerald Anderson. Duran is mentioned in a brief footnote in "The Truth
About the UFO Crash at Roswell" and never again, while the other three all have
serious credibility problems, said Pflock. A basic problem with all the witness
accounts, charge critics, is that they all came a minimum of 31 years after the
events in question, and in many cases were recounted more than 40 years after
the fact. Not only are memories this old of dubious reliability, say the
critics, they were also subject to contamination from other accounts they may
have heard. Finally, the shifting claims of Jesse Marcel, whose suspicions that
what he recovered in 1947 was "not of this world" sparked interest in the
incident in the first place, cast serious doubt on the reliability of what he
claimed, critics charge. In "The Roswell Incident", Marcel stated: "Actually,
this material may have "looked" like tinfoil and balsa wood, but the
resemblance ended there." And, "They took one picture of me on the floor
holding up some of the less-interesting metallic debris...The stuff in that one
photo was pieces of the actual stuff we found. It was not a staged photo."
Timothy Printy points out that the material Marcel positively identified as
being part of what he recovered is material that skeptics and UFO advocates
agree is debris from a balloon device. After that fact was pointed out to him,
Marcel changed his story to say that that material was not what he recovered.
Skeptics like Robert G. Todd argue that Marcel had a history of embellishment
and exaggeration, such as claiming to have been a pilot and having received
five Air Medals for shooting down enemy planes, claims that were found to be
false, and his evolving Roswell story was another instance of this.
Contradictory conclusions, questionable research, Roswell as a myth. Critics
point out that the large variety of claimed crash flights suggest events
spanning many years have been incorporated into a single event and that many
authors uncritically embrace anything that suggests aliens, even when accounts
contradict each other. Said Karl Pflock, a one-time advocate of an alien
incident at Roswell: "case for Roswell is a classic example of the triumph of
quantity over quality. The advocates of the crashed-saucer tale... simply
shovel everything that seems to support their view into the box marked
'Evidence' and say, 'See? Look at all this stuff. We "must" be right.'
[emphasis in original Never mind the contradictions. Never mind the lack of
independent supporting fact. Never mind the blatant absurdities." Kal Korff
suggests there are clear incentives for some to promote the idea of aliens at
Roswell, while many researchers are not doing competent work: "UFO field is
people who are willing to take advantage of the gullibility of others,
especially the paying public. Let's not pull any punches here: The Roswell UFO
myth has been very good business for UFO groups, publishers, for Hollywood, the
town of Roswell, the media, and UFOlogy ... [The number of researchers who
employ science and its disciplined methodology is appallingly small."
Gildenberg and others said that, when added up, there were as many as 11
reported alien recovery sites and these recoveries bore only a marginal
resemblance to the event as initially reported in 1947 or recounted later by
the initial witnesses. Some of these new accounts could have been confused
accounts of the several known recoveries of injured and dead from four military
plane crashes that occurred in the vicinity from 1948–50. Others could have
been recoveries of test dummies, as suggested by the Air Force in their
reports. Charles Ziegler argued that the Roswell story has all the hallmarks of
a traditional folk narrative. He identified six distinct narratives, starting
with "The Roswell Incident" (1980) and a process of transmission via
storytellers with a core story that was created from various witness accounts,
and was shaped and molded by those who carry on the group's (the UFO community)
tradition. Others were sought out to expand the core narrative, with those who
give accounts not in line with the core beliefs repudiated or omitted by the
"gatekeepers." Others retold the narratives in new forms, and the process would
repeat. Roswellian Syndrome. "Incident" The initial incident and reporting on
July 8, 1947 "Debunking" Soon after the initial reports, the mysterious object
was identified as a weather balloon, later confirmed to be a balloon array from
Project Mogul which had gone missing in flight. "Submergence" The news story
ended with the identification of the weather balloon. However, the event
lingered on in the ‘fading and recreative memories of some of those
involved’. Rumor and speculation simmered just below the surface in Roswell
and became part of the culture at large. In time, UFOlogists arrived, asked
leading questions and helped to spin a tale of crashed flying saucers and
government conspiracy of cover-up. "Mythologizing" The most complex part of the
syndrome. After the story submerged and over time, reemerged, it developed into
an ever expanding and elaborate myth. The mythologizing process included
exaggeration, faulty memory, folklore and deliberate hoaxing. The deliberate
hoaxing, usually self-serving for personal gain or promotion (for example,
promotion of the 1950 sci-fi movie The Flying Saucer) in turn fed the folklore.
"Reemergence and Media Bandwagon Effect" Publication of books such as ‘The
Roswell Incident’ by Berlitz and Moore in 1980, television shows and other
venues perpetuate the UFO crash and cover-up conspiracy beliefs that typically
mirror and oscillate with public sentiment toward the US government. The
authors predicted that the Roswellian Syndrome would "play out again and
again", not only in the Roswell story, but also in other UFO and conspiracy-
theorized stories. Developments since 1990s. Pro-UFO advocates dismiss Roswell
incident. One of the immediate outcomes of the Air Force reports on the Roswell
UFO incident was the decision by some prominent UFO researchers to view the
Roswell incident as not involving any alien craft. While the initial Air Force
report was a chief reason for this, another was the release of secret documents
from 1948 that showed that top Air Force officials did not know what the UFO
objects being reported in the media were and their suspicion they might be
Soviet spy vehicles. In January 1997, Karl T. Pflock, one of the more prominent
pro-UFO researchers, said “Based on my research and that of others, I'm as
certain as it's possible to be without absolute proof that no flying saucer or
saucers crashed in the general vicinity of Roswell or on the Plains of San
Agustin in 1947. The debris found by Mac Brazel...was the remains of something
very earthly, all but certainly something from the Top Secret Project
Mogul...The formerly highly classified record of correspondence and discussions
among top Air Force officials who were responsible for cracking the flying
saucer mystery from the mid-1940s through the early 1950s makes it crystal
clear that they didn't have any crashed saucer wreckage or bodies of saucer
crews, but they were desperate to have such evidence ..." Kent Jeffrey, who
organized petitions to ask President Bill Clinton to issue an Executive Order
to declassify any government information on the Roswell incident, similarly
concluded that no such aliens were likely involved. William L. Moore, one of
the earliest proponents of the Roswell incident, said this in 1997: "After deep
and careful consideration of recent developments concerning Roswell...I am no
longer of the opinion that the extraterrestrial explanation is the best
explanation for this event." Moore was co-author of the first book on Roswell,
"The Roswell Incident". Shoddy research revealed; witnesses suspected of
hoaxes. Around the same time, a serious rift between two prominent Roswell
authors emerged. Kevin D. Randle and Donald R. Schmitt had co-authored several
books on the subject and were generally acknowledged, along with Stanton
Friedman, as the leading researchers into the Roswell incident. The Air Force
reports on the incident suggested that basic research claimed to have been
carried out was not carried out, a fact verified in a 1995 "Omni" magazine
article. Additionally, Schmitt claimed he had a bachelor’s degree, a
master’s degree and was in the midst of pursuing a doctorate in criminology.
He also claimed to be a medical illustrator. When checked, it was revealed he
was in fact a letter carrier in Hartford, Wisconsin, and had no known academic
credentials. At the same time, Randle publicly distanced himself from Schmitt
and his research. Referring to Schmitt’s investigation of witness Dennis’s
accounts of a missing nurse at the Roswell base, he said: "The search for the
nurses proves that he will lie about anything. He will lie to anyone ... He has
revealed himself as a pathological liar ... I will have nothing more to do with
him." Additionally, several prominent witnesses were shown to be perpetrating
hoaxes, or suspected of doing so. Frank Kaufmann, a major source of alien
reports in the 1994 Randle and Schmitt book "The Truth About the UFO Crash at
Roswell" and a witness whose testimony it was charged was “ignored” by the
Air Force when compiling their reports, was shown, after his 2001 death, to
have been forging documents and inflating his role at Roswell. Randle and Mark
Rodeigher repudiated Kaufmann’s credibility in two 2002 articles. Glenn
Dennis, who testified that Roswell alien autopsies were carried out at the
Roswell base and that he and others were the subjects of threats, was deemed
one of the “least credible” Roswell witnesses by Randle in 1998. In Randle
and Schmitt’s 1991 book "UFO Crash at Roswell", Dennis’s story was featured
prominently. Randle said Dennis was not credible “for changing the name of
the nurse once we had proved she didn't exist.” Dennis’s accounts were also
doubted by researcher Pflock. Photo analysis; documentaries; new claims. UFO
researcher David Rudiak, and others before him, claimed that a telegram that
appears in one of the 1947 photos of balloon debris in Ramey's office contains
text that confirms that aliens and a "disk" were found. Rudiak and some other
examiners claim that when enlarged, the text on the paper General Ramey is
holding in his hand includes key phrases "the victims of the wreck" and "in/on
the 'disc'" plus other phrases seemingly in the context of a crashed vehicle
recovery. However, pro-UFO interpretations of this document are disputed by
other photoanalyses, such as one facilitated by researcher James Houran, Ph.D.,
that suggest the letters and words are indistinct. Other objections question
the plausibility of a general allowing himself to be photographed holding such
a document, raise issues with the format of the memo, and ponder the logic of
Ramey having in his possession a document he, as Rudiak argued, has sent, which
says "...the wreck you forwarded..." yet is supposedly addressed to the
Headquarters of the Army Air Force in Washington, not the Roswell Army Air
Field. In 2002, the Sci-Fi Channel sponsored an excavation at the Brazel site
in the hopes of uncovering any missed debris that the military failed to
collect. Although these results have so far turned out to be negative, the
University of New Mexico archaeological team did verify recent soil disruption
at the exact location that some witnesses said they saw a long, linear impact
groove. Gov. Bill Richardson of New Mexico, who headed the United States
Department of Energy under President Clinton, apparently found the results
provocative. In 2004, he wrote in a foreword to "The Roswell Dig Diaries", that
"the mystery surrounding this crash has never been adequately explained—not
by independent investigators, and not by the U.S. government." On October 26,
2007, Richardson (at the time a candidate for the Democratic Party nomination
for U.S. President) elaborated when he was asked about releasing government
files on Roswell. Richardson responded that when he was a Congressman, he
attempted to get information on behalf of his New Mexico constituents, but was
told by both the Department of Defense and Los Alamos Labs that the information
was classified. "That ticked me off," he said "The government doesn't tell the
truth as much as it should on a lot of issues." He promised to work on opening
the files if he were elected as President. In October 2002 before airing its
Roswell documentary, the Sci-Fi Channel also hosted a Washington UFO news
conference. John Podesta, President Clinton's chief of staff, appeared as a
member of the public relations firm hired by Sci-Fi to help get the government
to open up documents on the subject. Podesta stated, "It is time for the
government to declassify records that are more than 25 years old and to provide
scientists with data that will assist in determining the true nature of the
phenomena." In February 2005, the ABC TV network aired a UFO special hosted by
news anchor Peter Jennings. Jennings lambasted the Roswell case as a "myth ...
without a shred of evidence." ABC endorsed the Air Force's explanation that the
incident resulted solely from the crash of a Project Mogul balloon. "Top
Secret/Majic" (2005 edition). Stanton T. Friedman continues to defend his view
that the Majestic 12 documents, which describe a secret government agency
hiding information on recovered aliens, are authentic. In an afterword dated
April 2005 to a new edition of his book "Top Secret/Majic" (first published in
1996), he responds to more recent questions on their validity and concludes "I
am still convinced Roswell really happened, that the Eisenhower Briefing
Document [i.e., Majestic 12 ... others are the most important classified
documents ever leaked to the public." "Witness to Roswell" (2007). In June
2007, Donald Schmitt and his investigation partner Tom Carey published their
first book together, "Witness to Roswell". In this book, they claim a
"continuously growing roster of more than 600 people directly or indirectly
associated with the events at Roswell who support the first account - that
initial claim of the flying saucer recovery." New accounts of aliens or alien
recoveries were described, including from Walter Haut who wrote the initial
press release in 1947. A new date was suggested for a crash of a mysterious
object—the evening of Thursday, July 3, 1947. Also, unlike previous accounts,
Brazel took debris to Corona, where he showed fragments to local residents in
the local bar, hardware store and elsewhere, and to Capitan to the south, while
portions of the object ended up at a 4 July rodeo. Numerous people are
described as visiting the debris field and taking souvenirs before Brazel
finally went to Roswell to report the find on July 6. Once the military was
alerted to the debris, extensive efforts were undertaken to retrieve those
souvenirs: "Ranch houses were and ransacked. The wooden floors of livestock
sheds were pried loose plank by plank and underground cold storage fruit
cellars were emptied of all their contents." The subsequent events are related
as per the sequence in previous books, except for a second recovery site of an
alien body at the Foster ranch. This recovery near the debris field is the same
site mentioned in 1991's "UFO Crash at Roswell". The authors suggest that
Brazel discovered the second site some days after finding the debris field, and
this prompted him to travel to Roswell and report his find to the authorities.
Neither Barnett nor the archaeologists are present at this body site. While
noting the earlier "major problems" with Barnett's account, which caused
Schmitt and previous partner Randle to omit Barnett's claim in 1994's "The
Truth about the UFO Crash at Roswell", the new book further notes another site
mentioned in the 1994 publication. This site closer to Roswell "turned out to
be bogus, as it was based upon the testimony of a single, alleged eyewitness
Kaufmann who himself was later discovered to have been a purveyor of false
information." Jim Ragsdale, whose alien account opened that book and who was
claimed to have been present along with some archaeologists, is not mentioned
in the new book. The book includes claims that Major Marcel saw alien bodies, a
claim not present in the previous books mentioned. Two witnesses are cited who
say Marcel briefly mentioned seeing bodies, one a relative and another a tech
sergeant who worked with Marcel's intelligence team. Much additional new
testimony is presented to support notions that alien bodies were found at the
Foster ranch and at another main crash site along with a craft, then processed
at the base in a hangar and at the hospital, and finally flown out in
containers, all under very tight security. The book suggests Brazel found "two
or three alien bodies" about two miles east of the debris field and describes
the rest of a stricken alien craft along with the remainder of the crew
remaining airborne for some 30 more miles before crashing at another site about
40 miles north/northwest of Roswell (but not the same site described by
Kaufmann). The authors claim to have located this final crash site in 2005
where "an additional two or three dead aliens and one live one were discovered
by civilian archaeologists," but offer no more information about the new site.
Walter Haut, as the Roswell Army Air Field public affairs officer, had drafted
the initial press release that went out over the news wires on the afternoon of
July 8, 1947, announcing a "flying disc". This was the only direct involvement
Haut had previously described in public statements and signed affidavits. The
book presents a new affidavit that Haut signed in 2002 in which he claims much
greater personal knowledge and involvement, including seeing alien corpses and
craft, and involvement in a cover-up. Haut died in 2005. Another new first-hand
account from MP Elias Benjamin describes how he guarded aliens on gurneys taken
to the Roswell base hospital from the same hangar. Similarly, family members of
Miriam Bush, secretary to the chief medical officer at Roswell base, told of
having been led into an examination room where alien corpses were laid out on
gurneys. In both accounts, one of the aliens was said to be still alive. The
book also recounted earlier testimony of the Anaya family about picking up New
Mexico Lt. Governor Joseph Montoya at the base, and a badly shaken Montoya
relating that he saw four alien bodies at the base hangar, one of them alive.
Benjamin's and Bush's accounts, as do a few lesser ones, again place aliens at
the Roswell base hospital, as had the Glenn Dennis story from almost 20 years
before. The book notes that Dennis had been found to have told lies, and
therefore is a supplier of unreliable testimony, but had nevertheless told
others of incidents at the Roswell base long before it became associated with
aliens in the late 1970s. Walter Haut controversy. The publishing of the Walter
Haut affidavit in "Witness to Roswell", wherein Haut described a cover-up and
seeing alien corpses, ignited a controversy in UFO circles. While many embraced
his accounts as confirmation of the presence of aliens from a person who was
known to have been on the base in 1947, others raised questions about the
credibility of the accounts. UFO researcher Dennis G. Balthaser, who along with
fellow researcher Wendy Connors interviewed Haut on-camera in 2000, doubted
that the same man he interviewed could have written the affidavit he signed.
"2000 video shows a man that couldn't remember where he took basic training,
names, dates, etc., while the 2002 affidavit is very detailed and precise with
information Haut couldn't accurately remember 2 years after he was video
taped." "Witness to Roswell" co-author Donald R. Schmitt, he notes, admitted
that the affidavit was not written by Haut, but prepared for him to sign, based
on statements Haut had made privately to Schmitt and co-author Tom Carey over a
period of years. And further, notes Balthaser, neither he nor Carey were there
when Haut signed the affidavit and the witness' name has not been revealed,
casting doubt on the circumstances of the signing. He had further questions
about what he saw as problems with the 2002 account. If the cover-up was
decided at a meeting at Roswell, he asked, "why was it necessary for Major
Marcel to fly debris from Roswell to General Ramey’s office in Ft Worth,
since they had all handled the debris in the meeting and apparently set up the
cover-up operation?" He also wondered which Haut statements were true: a 1993
affidavit he signed, the 2000 video interview, or the 2002 affidavit. Bill
Birnes, writing for UFO Magazine, summarizes that whatever disagreements there
are about the 2000 video and the 2002 affidavit, "I think Walter Haut's 2002
affidavit really says it all and agrees, on its material facts, with Walter's
2000 interview with Dennis Balthaser and Wendy Connors. Dennis said he agrees
with me, too, on this point." A comparison of the affidavit and interview shows
that in both Haut said he saw a craft and at least one body in a base hangar
and also attended a Roswell staff meeting where General Ramey was present and
where Ramey put a cover-up into place. Birnes also says that Carey told that
while Haut may not have written the affidavit, "his statements were typed,
shown to him for his review and agreement, and then affirmed by him in the
presence of a witness... The fact that a notary was present and sealed the
document should end any doubt as to the reality of its existence." Julie
Shuster, Haut's daughter and Director of the International UFO Museum in
Roswell, said that Schmitt had written the affidavit based on years of
conversations he and Carey had had with him. Writing in the September 2007
MUFON newsletter, she said she and Haut reviewed the document, that "he did not
want to make any changes," and in the presence of two witnesses, a notary
public from the museum and a visitor, both unidentified, he signed the
affidavit. UFO FBI document release, 2011. In April 2011, the FBI posted a
document from 1950 on their website written by agent Guy Hottel which discussed
a report forwarded by an investigator from the Air Force of three alien craft
and their occupants having been recovered in New Mexico. The memo stated that
"three so-called flying saucers" were recovered, each circular in shape with
raised centers, each about 50 feet in diameter. Three occupants of "human
shape," each about three feet tall, were found in each craft, and all were
dressed "in metallic cloth of a very fine texture." The memo said that reports
were "high-powered radar" had affected the alien crafts' control systems,
causing them to crash. No date was mentioned, though the memo was date-stamped
March 22, 1950, and no location more specific than "New Mexico" was mentioned.
The memo stated that "no further evaluation was attempted" by the person who
supplied the information. Numerous sources connected the memo to the Roswell
UFO incident of 1947. Other sources said the memo had been in the public domain
for years and was revealed as a hoax as far back as 1952 in an article in True
magazine. They said the hoax was perpetrated by several men who were peddling a
device purported to be able to locate gold, oil, gas or anything their victims
sought, based on supposed alien technology. The two men, Silas Newton and Leo
A. Gebauer, were convicted of fraud in 1953. "Area 51" (2011). The book "" by
Annie Jacobsen, based on interviews with scientists and engineers who worked in
Area 51, dismisses the alien story. Instead, it suggests that Josef Mengele was
recruited by the Soviet leader Joseph Stalin to produce "grotesque, child-size
aviators" to be remotely piloted and landed in America to cause hysteria in the
likeness of Orson Welles' 1938 radio drama "War of the Worlds", but that the
aircraft crashed and the incident was hushed up by the Americans. Jacobsen
writes that the bodies found at the crash site were children. Grotesquely but
similarly deformed, aged around 12, each under five feet tall, with large heads
and abnormally shaped oversize eyes. They were neither aliens nor consenting
airmen, but human guinea pigs. The book was sharply criticized for extensive
errors in an essay by two scientists at the Federation of American Scientists.
Cultural influence. The Roswell incident has become a popular subject of many
science fiction movies, television series, video games, and books. Film. Kevin
D. Randle and Donald R. Schmitt's 1991 nonfiction book "UFO Crash at Roswell"
inspired the 1994 American television film "Roswell", which starred Martin
Sheen and Kyle MacLachlan. The film depicts Major Jesse Marcel trying to
discover the truth about strange debris found on a local rancher's field in
Roswell in July 1947. The film received a Golden Globe Award nomination for
Best Mini-Series or Motion Picture Made for Television, but did not win. The
1996 science fiction film Independence Day featured a top secret underground
facility at Area 51, which housed a recovered spacecraft and three alien bodies
that had been stored there since the Roswell incident. The 2008 science fiction
film Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull begin in "Hanger 51"
(an allusion to Area 51 and Hangar 18 within the base,) and had Dr. Jones lead
Soviet agents to a mummified Alien body from the Roswell Site, contained in a
chest labeled "Roswell, New Mexico. July, 1947", Jones stating that he was one
of twenty-one experts taken in secret to the original Roswell crash to examine
the unidentified body. Literature. Several novels have been written about the
Roswell incident, including Whitley Strieber's "Majestic" (1989), Kevin D.
Randle's "Operation Roswell" (2004), and Sonny Whitelaw's "" (2007), "The True
Meaning of Smekday" by Adam Rex and "Gotcha Gas: Debacle Near Roswell" (2011),
an historical parody by Banak and Weimer. Television. An American television
series, "Roswell High", later renamed "Roswell", aired from 1999 to 2002,
originally on The WB Television Network and later on UPN. Based on Melinda
Metz's "Roswell High" children's book series, the program followed the lives of
four extraterrestrials who had survived the Roswell crash and assumed the form
of human teenagers. An American animation series, "Futurama", has an episode
called "Roswell That Ends Well". The episode contains jokes implying that
Zoidberg was the alien found in Roswell on the famous date. According to the
episode "The Best Christmas Story Never Told" of the American television series
"American Dad!", the extraterrestrial character Roger claims he has been on the
planet for sixty years (accurate, at the time the episode aired), originally
crashing "in Roswell in '47". The "" episode "" reveals that this incident was
the unintentional crash of a Ferengi vessel from the 24th century, owned by
main character Quark who was accompanied by his brother Rom, nephew Nog, and
nemesis Odo. The 1996-97 NBC television series "Dark Skies" featured an
interpretation of the Roswell incident as the starting point of the super-
secret government agency Majestic 12 which was involved in a covert war between
humans and an alien conspiracy. In "Dark Skies", President Harry Truman was
present at the Roswell site in 1947, when an alien representative demanded
humanity's unconditional surrender. A fictional version of Jesse Marcel, played
by actor Richard Gilliland, appeared in several episodes of the series. The
1998 - 2001 UPN television series "Seven Days" featured a top-secret government
time travel project based on alien technology recovered from the Roswell crash
site. One episode of the series featured an alien survivor of the UFO crash.
Comics, series and animation. The comic book series "The Invisibles"
(1994–2000), by Grant Morrison, made extensive use of the Roswell incident in
its second volume. A humorous Bongo Comics series, called "Roswell, Little
Green Man", ran from 1996 to 1999 and followed the misadventures of an
extraterrestrial who survived from the craft. The graphic novel "Roswell,
Texas" features an alternate history in which the site of the UFO crash was
part of the still-independent republic of Texas. In the anime, webcomic and
manga "", the personification of America has an alien friend named Tony, who
began living with him after the Roswell incident. In the 2007 American comic
book "Atarian Conquest", an alien named Irvyll, rescued from Area 51 by his
home race, claims to be the descendant of the aliens who "crashed in a nearby
Eartian desert in the mid 1900's". Music. The 2004 album, The Crash of '47 from
hard rock band Atomship is a direct reference to the Roswell incident. The
American band Foo Fighters takes its name from an old term for UFOs, specific
to "that trailed the wings of fighter planes, and has named its record label
Roswell Records. The band has performed concerts on the site of the Roswell Air
Force Base and at the site of the crash. Foo Fighters frontman Dave Grohl is
known for having an interest in supernatural phenomena. Singer/songwriter John
Stewart included a song called "Mac Brasel's (sic) Farm" on his 1997 album
"Rough Sketches From Rt. 66." Swedish Death Metal-Band Hypocrisy wrote a song
called "Roswell 47", released on their 1996 album "Abducted". Toys. Two plastic
kits of the Roswell ship were made by Testors, following the forensic
reconstructions of Bill McDonald. One shows the crash site, and the other just
the intact ship.
