Sanhedrin The Sanhedrin (Hebrew: "sanhedrîn", , "synedrion", "sitting
together," hence "assembly" or "council") was an assembly of seventy to seventy
three people appointed in every city in the biblical Land of Israel. The
Mishnah arrives at the number twenty-three based on an exegetical derivation:
It must be possible for a "community" to vote for both conviction and
exoneration (). The minimum size of a "community" is 10 (; i.e. the 10 spies).
One more is required to achieve a majority (11–10), but a simple majority
cannot convict (), and so an additional judge is required (12–10). Finally, a
court should not have an even number of judges to prevent deadlocks; thus 23.
This court dealt with only religious matters. The Great Sanhedrin was made up
of a Chief/Prince/Leader called "Nasi" (at some times this position may have
been held by the "Kohen Gadol" or the High Priest), a vice chief justice ("Av
Beit Din"), and sixty-nine general members. In the Second Temple period, the
Great Sanhedrin met in the Hall of Hewn Stones in the Temple in Jerusalem. The
court convened every day except festivals and Shabbos. In the late 3rd century,
to avoid persecution, its authoritative decisions were issued under the name of
"Beis HaMidrash". The penultimate binding decision of the Sanhedrin was in 358,
when the Hebrew Calendar was adopted. The "Sanhedrin" was dissolved after
continued persecution by the Roman Empire. Over the centuries, there have been
attempts to revive the institution, such as the Grand Sanhedrin convened by
Napoleon Bonaparte and modern attempts in Israel. The "Sanhedrin" is mentioned
in the Gospels in relation to the Sanhedrin Trial of Jesus. Early Sanhedrin.
The Hasmonean court in the Land of Israel, presided over by Alexander Jannaeus,
king of Judea until 76 BC, followed by his wife, was called "Synhedrion" or
"Sanhedrin." The exact nature of this early Sanhedrin is not clear. It may have
been a body of sages and/or priests, or a political, legislative and judicial
institution. Only after the destruction of the Second Temple was the Sanhedrin
made up only of sages. Great and Lesser Sanhedrin. The Talmud (tractate
Sanhedrin) identifies two classes of rabbinical courts called Sanhedrin, a
Great Sanhedrin (בית דין הגדול) and a Lesser Sanhedrin (בית
דין הקטן). Each city could have its own lesser Sanhedrin of 23 judges,
but there could be only one Great Sanhedrin of 71, which among other roles
acted as the Supreme Court, taking appeals from cases decided by lesser courts.
The numbers of judges were predicated on eliminating the possibility of a tie
and the last to cast their vote was the head of the court. Function and
procedures. The Sanhedrin as a body claimed powers that lesser Jewish courts
did not have. As such, they were the only ones who could try the king, extend
the boundaries of the Temple and Jerusalem, and were the ones to whom all
questions of law were finally put. Before 191 BC the High Priest acted as the
"ex officio" head of the Sanhedrin, but in 191 BC, when the Sanhedrin lost
confidence in the High Priest, the office of Nasi was created. After the time
of Hillel the Elder (late 1st century BC and early 1st century AD), the Nasi
was almost invariably a descendant of Hillel. The second highest-ranking member
of the Sanhedrin was called the Av Beit Din, or "Head of the Court" (literally,
Av Beit Din = "father of the house of judgment"), who presided over the
Sanhedrin when it sat as a criminal court. The Sanhedrin met in a building
known as the Hall of Hewn Stones ("Lishkat Ha-Gazith"), which has been placed
by the Talmud and many scholars as built into the north wall of the Temple
Mount, half inside the sanctuary and half outside, with doors providing access
both to the Temple and to the outside. The name presumably arises to
distinguish it from the buildings in the Temple complex used for ritual
purposes, which had to be constructed of stones unhewn by any iron implements.
In some cases, it was only necessary for a 23-member panel (functioning as a
Lesser Sanhedrin) to convene. In general, the full panel of 71 judges was only
convened on matters of national significance (e.g., a declaration of war) or in
the event that the 23-member panel could not reach a conclusive verdict. By the
end of the Second Temple period, the Sanhedrin reached its pinnacle of
importance, legislating all aspects of Jewish religious and political life
within the parameters laid down by Biblical and Rabbinic tradition. After the
destruction of the Second Temple in 70, the Sanhedrin was re-established in
Yavneh with reduced authority. The imperial Roman government and legislation
recognized it as the Palestinian Patriarchate, the ultimate authority in Jewish
religious matters. The seat of the Patriarchate moved to Usha under the
presidency of Gamaliel II in 80 CE. In 116 it moved back to Yavneh, and then
again back to Usha. It moved in 140 to Shefaram under the presidency of Shimon
ben Gamliel II, and to Beit Shearim and Sephoris in 163, under the presidency
of Judah I. Finally, it moved to Tiberias in 193, under the presidency of
Gamaliel III (193–230) ben Judah haNasi, where it became more of a
consistory, but still retained, under the presidency of Judah II (230–270),
the power of excommunication. During the presidency of Gamaliel IV (270–290),
due to Roman persecution, it dropped the name Sanhedrin; and its authoritative
decisions were subsequently issued under the name of "Beth HaMidrash". The
failure to rebuild the Temple has been ascribed to the Galilee earthquake of
363, and to the Jews' ambivalence about the project. Sabotage is a possibility,
as is an accidental fire. Divine intervention was the common view among
Christian historians of the time. Julian's support of Jews, coming after the
hostility of many earlier Emperors, meant that Jews called him "Julian the
Hellene". As a reaction to Julian's pro-Jewish stance, Theodosius I forbade the
Sanhedrin to assemble and declared ordination illegal. Capital punishment was
prescribed for any Rabbi who received ordination and complete destruction of
the town where the ordination occurred. However, since the Hebrew calendar was
based on witnesses' testimony, that had become far too dangerous to collect,
Hillel II recommended change to a mathematically based calendar that was
adopted at a clandestine, and maybe final, meeting in 358. This marked the last
universal decision made by that body. Gamaliel VI (400–425) was the
Sanhedrin's last president. With his death in 425, executed by Theodosius II
for erecting new synagogues contrary to the imperial decree, the title Nasi,
the last remains of the ancient Sanhedrin, became illegal. An imperial decree
of 426 diverted the patriarchs' tax ("post excessum patriarchorum") into the
imperial treasury Archaeological findings. In 2004, excavations in Tiberias
conducted by the Israel Antiquities Authority uncovered a structure dating to
the 3rd century CE that may have been the seat of the Sanhedrin when it
convened in that city. At the time it was called Beit Hava'ad. Revival
attempts. The Sanhedrin is traditionally viewed as the last institution that
commanded universal Jewish authority among the Jewish people in the long chain
of tradition from Moses until the present day. Since its dissolution in 358 by
imperial decree, there have been several attempts to re-establish this body
either as a self-governing body, or as a puppet of a sovereign government.
There are records of what may have been of attempts to reform the Sanhedrin in
Arabia, in Jerusalem under the Caliph 'Umar, and in Babylon (Iraq), but none of
these attempts were given any attention by Rabbinic authorities and little
information is available about them. Napoleon Bonaparte's "Grand Sanhedrin".
The "Grand Sanhedrin" was a Jewish high court convened by Napoleon I to give
legal sanction to the principles expressed by the Assembly of Notables in
answer to the twelve questions submitted to it by the government (see Jew.
Encyc. v. 468, s.v. France). On October 6, 1806, the Assembly of Notables
issued a proclamation to all the Jewish communities of Europe, inviting them to
send delegates to the Sanhedrin, to convene on October 20. This proclamation,
written in Hebrew, French, German, and Italian, speaks in extravagant terms of
the importance of this revived institution and of the greatness of its imperial
protector. While the action of Napoleon aroused in many Jews of Germany the
hope that, influenced by it, their governments also would grant them the rights
of citizenship, others looked upon it as a political contrivance. When in the
war against Prussia (1806–7) the emperor invaded Poland and the Jews rendered
great services to his army, he remarked, laughing, "The sanhedrin is at least
useful to me." David Friedländer and his friends in Berlin described it as a
spectacle that Napoleon offered to the Parisians. Modern attempts in Israel.
Since the dissolution of the Sanhedrin in 358, there has been no universally
recognized authority within Jewish law. Maimonides (1135–1204) was one of the
greatest scholars of the Middle Ages, and is arguably one of the most widely
accepted scholars among the Jewish people since the closing of the Talmud in
500. Influenced by the rationalist school of thought and generally showing a
preference for a natural (as opposed to miraculous) redemption for the Jewish
people, Maimonides proposed a rationalist solution for achieving the goal of
re-establishing the highest court in Jewish tradition and reinvesting it with
the same authority it had in former years. There have been several attempts to
implement Maimonides' recommendations, the latest being in modern times. There
have been rabbinical attempts to renew Semicha and re-establish a Sanhedrin by
Rabbi Jacob Berab in 1538, Rabbi Yisroel Shklover in 1830, Rabbi Aharon Mendel
haCohen in 1901, Rabbi Zvi Kovsker in 1940 and Rabbi Yehuda Leib Maimon in
1949. In October 2004 (Tishrei 5765), a group of rabbis representing varied
Orthodox communities in Israel undertook a ceremony in Tiberias, where the
original Sanhedrin was disbanded, which is claimed to re-establish the body
according to the proposal of Maimonides and the Jewish legal rulings of Rabbi
Yosef Karo. The controversial attempt has been subject to debate within
different Jewish communities.
