Spanish Inquisition The Tribunal of the Holy Office of the Inquisition (),
commonly known as the Spanish Inquisition ("Inquisición española"), was a
tribunal established in 1480 by Catholic Monarchs, Ferdinand II of Aragon and
Isabella I of Castile. It was intended to maintain Catholic orthodoxy in their
kingdoms, and to replace the Medieval Inquisition which was under Papal
control. It became the most substantive of the three different manifestations
of the wider Christian Inquisition along with the Roman Inquisition and
Portuguese Inquisition. The Inquisition was originally intended in large part
to ensure the orthodoxy of those who converted from Judaism and Islam. This
regulation of the faith of the newly converted was intensified after the royal
decrees issued in 1492 and 1501 ordering Jews and Muslims to convert or leave.
Various motives have been proposed for the monarchs' decision to fund the
Inquisition such as increasing political authority, weakening opposition,
suppressing "conversos", profiting from confiscation of the property of
convicted heretics, reducing social tensions and protecting the kingdom from
the danger of a fifth column. The body was under the direct control of the
Spanish monarchy. It was not definitively abolished until 1834, during the
reign of Isabella II, after a period of declining influence in the previous
century. Previous Inquisitions. The Inquisition was created through papal bull,
"Ad Abolendam", issued at the end of the 12th century by Pope Lucius III as a
way to combat the Albigensian heresy in southern France. There were a huge
number of tribunals of the Papal Inquisition in various European kingdoms
during the Middle Ages. In the Kingdom of Aragon, a tribunal of the Papal
Inquisition was established by the statute of "Excommunicamus" of Pope Gregory
IX, in 1232, during the era of the Albigensian heresy. Its principal
representative was Ramon de Penyafort. With time, its importance was diluted,
and, by the middle of the 15th century, it was almost forgotten although still
there according to the law. There was never a tribunal of the Papal Inquisition
in Castile. Members of the episcopate were charged with surveillance of the
faithful and punishment of transgressors. During the Middle Ages, in Castile,
little attention was paid to heresy by the Catholic ruling class. Jews and
Muslims were tolerated and generally allowed to follow their traditional laws
and customs in domestic matters. However, by law, they were considered inferior
to Catholics and were subject to discriminatory legislation. The Spanish
Inquisition can be seen as an answer to the multi-religious nature of Spanish
society following the reconquest of the Iberian Peninsula from the Muslim
Moors. For almost 600 years, much of the Iberian Peninsula was dominated by the
Moors following their invasion of the peninsula in 711 until the early 13th
century. Following the Christian victory at the Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa
(1212), and the fall of Córdoba (1236) and Seville (1248), Christian rule was
re-established for most of the peninsula. Only the small region of Granada
remained under Muslim rule which also ended with a final Christian victory in
1492. However, the Reconquista did not result in the total expulsion of Muslims
from Spain, since they, along with Jews, were tolerated by the ruling Catholic
elite. Large cities, especially Seville, Valladolid and Barcelona, had
significant Jewish populations centered in Juderia, but in the coming years the
Muslims were increasingly subjugated by alienation and torture. The Jews, who
had previously thrived under Muslim rule, now suffered similar maltreatment.
Post-reconquest medieval Spain has been characterized by Americo Castro and
some other Iberianists as a society of "convivencia", that is relatively
peaceful co-existence, albeit punctuated by occasional conflict among the
ruling Catholics and the Jews and Muslims. However, as Henry Kamen notes, "so-
called convivencia was always a relationship between unequals." Despite their
legal inequality, there was a long tradition of Jewish service to the crown of
Aragon and Jews occupied many important posts, both religious and political.
Castile itself had an unofficial rabbi. Ferdinand's father John II named the
Jewish Abiathar Crescas to be Court Astronomer. Nevertheless, in some parts of
Spain towards the end of the 14th century, there was a wave of violent anti-
Judaism, encouraged by the preaching of Ferrand Martinez, Archdeacon of Ecija.
The pogroms of June 1391 were especially bloody: in Seville, hundreds of Jews
were killed, and the synagogue was completely destroyed. The number of people
killed was also high in other cities, such as Córdoba, Valencia and Barcelona.
One of the consequences of these programs was the mass conversion of Jews.
Forced baptism was contrary to the law of the Catholic Church, and
theoretically anybody who had been forcibly baptized could legally return to
Judaism; this however was very narrowly interpreted. Legal definitions of the
time theoretically acknowledged that a forced baptism was not a valid
sacrament, but confined this to cases where it was literally administered by
physical force: a person who had consented to baptism under threat of death or
serious injury was still regarded as a voluntary convert, and accordingly
forbidden to revert to Judaism. After the public violence, many of the
converted "felt it safer to remain in their new religion." Thus after 1391 a
new social group appeared and were referred to as "conversos" or "New
Christians". Many "conversos", now freed from the antisemitic restrictions
imposed on Jewish employment, attained important positions in 15th century
Spain, including positions in the government and in the Church. Among many
others, physicians Andrés Laguna and Francisco Lopez Villalobos (Ferdinand's
court physician), writers Juan del Enzina, Juan de Mena, Diego de Valera and
Alonso de Palencia, and bankers Luis de Santangel and Gabriel Sanchez (who
financed the voyage of Christopher Columbus) were all "conversos". "Conversos"
- not without opposition - managed to attain high positions in the
ecclesiastical hierarchy, at times becoming severe detractors of Judaism. Some
even received titles of nobility, and as a result, during the following century
some works attempted to demonstrate that virtually all of the nobles of Spain
were descended from Israelites. Activity of the Inquisition. The start of the
Inquisition. Alonso de Hojeda, a Dominican friar from Seville, convinced Queen
Isabel of the existence of Crypto-Judaism among Andalusian "conversos" during
her stay in Seville between 1477 and 1478. A report, produced by Pedro
González de Mendoza, Archbishop of Seville, and by the Segovian Dominican
Tomás de Torquemada, corroborated this assertion. The monarchs decided to
introduce the Inquisition to Castile to discover and punish crypto-Jews, and
requested the Pope's assent. Ferdinand II of Aragon pressured Pope Sixtus IV to
agree to an Inquisition controlled by the monarchy by threatening to withdraw
military support at a time when the Turks were a threat to Rome. The Pope
issued a bull to stop the Inquisition but was pressured into withdrawing it. On
November 1, 1478, Pope Sixtus IV published the Papal bull, "Exigit Sinceras
Devotionis Affectus", through which he gave the monarchs exclusive authority to
name the inquisitors in their kingdoms. The first two inquisitors, Miguel de
Morillo and Juan de San Martín were not named, however, until two years later,
on September 27, 1480 in Medina del Campo. The first "auto-da-fé" was held in
Seville on February 6, 1481: six people were burned alive. From there, the
Inquisition grew rapidly in the Kingdom of Castile. By 1492, tribunals existed
in eight Castilian cities: Ávila, Córdoba, Jaén, Medina del Campo, Segovia,
Sigüenza, Toledo, and Valladolid. Sixtus IV promulgated a new bull
categorically prohibiting the Inquisition's extension to Aragon, affirming
that, Cited in Kamen, op. cit., p. 49. In 1483, Jews were expelled from all of
Andalusia. Ferdinand pressured the Pope to promulgate a new bull. He did so on
October 17, 1483, naming Tomás de Torquemada Inquisidor General of Aragón,
Valencia and Catalonia. Torquemada quickly established procedures for the
Inquisition. A new court would be announced with a thirty day grace period for
confessions and the gathering of accusations by neighbors. Evidence that was
used to identify a crypto-Jew included the absence of chimney smoke on
Saturdays (a sign the family might secretly be honoring the Sabbath) or the
buying of many vegetables before Passover or the purchase of meat from a
converted butcher. The court employed physical torture to extract confessions.
Crypto-Jews were allowed to confess and do penance, although those who relapsed
were burned at the stake. In 1484 Pope Innocent VIII attempted to allow appeals
to Rome against the Inquisition, but Ferdinand in December 1484 and again in
1509 decreed death and confiscation for anyone trying to make use of such
procedures without royal permission. With this, the Inquisition became the only
institution that held authority across all the realms of the Spanish monarchy,
and, in all of them, a useful mechanism at the service of the crown. However,
the cities of Aragón continued resisting, and even saw revolt, as in Teruel
from 1484 to 1485. However, the murder of "Inquisidor" Pedro Arbués in
Zaragoza on September 15, 1485, caused public opinion to turn against the
"conversos" and in favour of the Inquisition. In Aragón, the Inquisitorial
courts were focused specifically on members of the powerful "converso"
minority, ending their influence in the Aragonese administration. The
Inquisition was extremely active between 1480 and 1530. Different sources give
different estimates of the number of trials and executions in this period;
Henry Kamen estimates about 2,000 executed, based on the documentation of the
"autos-da-fé", the great majority being "conversos" of Jewish origin. He
offers striking statistics: 91.6% of those judged in Valencia between 1484 and
1530 and 99.3% of those judged in Barcelona between 1484 and 1505 were of
Jewish origin. "In 1498 the pope was still trying to...gain acceptance for his
own attitude towards the New Christians, which was generally more moderate than
that of the Inquisition and the local rulers." Expulsion of Jews and repression
of "conversos". The Spanish Inquisition had been set up in part to prevent
"conversos" from engaging in Jewish practices, which, as Christians, they were
supposed to have given up. However this remedy for securing the orthodoxy of
"conversos"' religion was eventually deemed inadequate, since the main
justification the monarchy gave for formally expelling all Jews from Spain was
the "great harm suffered by Christians (i.e. conversos) from the contact,
intercourse and communication which they have with the Jews, who always attempt
in various ways to seduce faithful Christians from our Holy Catholic Faith".
The Alhambra Decree, which ordered the expulsion, was issued in January 1492.
Historic accounts of the numbers of Jews who left Spain have varied enormously.
Historians of the period give extremely high figures: Juan de Mariana speaks of
800,000 people, and Don Isaac Abravanel of 300,000. Modern estimates, based on
careful examination of official documents and population estimates of
communities, are much lower: Henry Kamen estimates that, of a population of
approximately 80,000 Jews, about one half or 40,000 chose emigration. The Jews
of the kingdom of Castile emigrated mainly to Portugal (whence they were
expelled in 1497) and to North Africa. However, according to Henry Kamen, the
Jews of the kingdom of Aragon, went "to adjacent Christian lands, mainly to
Italy", rather than to Muslim lands as is often assumed. The Sefardim or Anusim
descendants of Spanish Jews gradually migrated throughout Europe and North
Africa, where they established communities in many cities. They also went to
New Spain, the Ottoman Empire and North America (the American Southwest),
Central and South America. Tens of thousands of Jews were baptised in the three
months before the deadline for expulsion, some 40,000 if one accepts the totals
given by Kamen: most of these undoubtedly to avoid expulsion, rather than as a
sincere change of faith. These "conversos" were the principal concern of the
Inquisition; being suspected of continuing to practice Judaism put them at risk
of denunciation and trial. The most intense period of persecution of
"conversos" lasted until 1530. From 1531 to 1560, however, the percentage of
"conversos" among the Inquisition trials dropped to 3% of the total. There was
a rebound of persecutions when a group of crypto-Jews was discovered in
Quintanar de la Orden in 1588; and there was a rise in denunciations of
"conversos" in the last decade of the 16th century. At the beginning of the
17th century, some "conversos" who had fled to Portugal began to return to
Spain, fleeing the persecution of the Portuguese Inquisition, founded in 1532.
This led to a rapid increase in the trials of crypto-Jews, among them a number
of important financiers. In 1691, during a number of "autos-da-fé" in Majorca,
36 "chuetas", or "conversos" of Majorca, were burned. During the 18th century
the number of "conversos" accused by the Inquisition decreased significantly.
Manuel Santiago Vivar, tried in Córdoba in 1818, was the last person tried for
being a crypto-Jew. The generally accepted number burnt at the stake by the
Inquisition (including all categories such as Protestants, blasphemers,
bigamists and crypto-Jews) is below 5,000 (see below). Repression of Moriscos.
The Inquisition not only hunted for Protestants and for false converts from
Judaism among the "conversos", but also searched for false or relapsed converts
among the Moriscos, forced converts from Islam. The Moriscos were mostly
concentrated in the recently conquered kingdom of Granada, in Aragon, and in
Valencia. Officially, all Muslims in the Crown of Castile had been forcibly
converted to Christianity in 1502. Muslims in the Crown of Aragon were obliged
to convert by Charles I's decree of 1526, as most had been forcibly baptized
during the Revolt of the Brotherhoods (1519–1523) and these baptisms were
declared to be valid. Many Moriscos were suspected of practising Islam in
secret, and the jealousy with which they guarded the privacy of their domestic
life prevented the verification of this suspicion. Initially they were not
severely persecuted by the Inquisition, but experienced a policy of
evangelization without torture, a policy not followed with those "conversos"
who were suspected of being crypto-Jews. There were various reasons for this.
Most importantly, in the kingdoms of Valencia and Aragon a large number of the
Moriscos were under the jurisdiction of the nobility, and persecution would
have been viewed as a frontal assault on the economic interests of this
powerful social class. Still, fears ran high among the population that the
Moriscos were traitorous, especially in Granada. The coast was regularly raided
by Barbary pirates backed by Spain's enemy the Ottoman Empire, and the Moriscos
were suspected of aiding them. In the second half of the century, late in the
reign of Philip II, conditions worsened between Old Christians and Moriscos.
The 1568–1570 Morisco Revolt in Granada was harshly suppressed, and the
Inquisition intensified its attention to the Moriscos. From 1570 Morisco cases
became predominant in the tribunals of Zaragoza, Valencia and Granada; in the
tribunal of Granada, between 1560 and 1571, 82% of those accused were Moriscos.
Still, according to Kamen, the Moriscos did not experience the same harshness
as judaizing "conversos" and Protestants, and the number of capital punishments
was proportionally less. In 1609 King Philip III, upon the advice of his
financial adviser the Duke of Lerma and Archbishop of Valencia Juan de Ribera,
decreed the Expulsion of the Moriscos. Hundreds of thousands of Moriscos were
expelled, some of them probably sincere Christians. This was further fueled by
the religious intolerance of Archbishop Ribera who quoted the Old Testament
texts ordering the enemies of God to be slain without mercy and setting forth
the duties of kings to extirpate them. The edict required: 'The Moriscos to
depart, under the pain of death and confiscation, without trial or sentence...
to take with them no money, bullion, jewels or bills of exchange... just what
they could carry.' So successful was the enterprise, in the space of months,
Spain was emptied of its Moriscos. Expelled were the Moriscos of Aragon,
Murcia, Catalonia, Castile, Mancha and Extremadura. As for the Moriscos of
Granada, such as the Herrador family who held positions in the Church and
magistracy, they still had to struggle against exile and confiscation. An
indeterminate number of Moriscos remained in Spain and, during the 17th
century, the Inquisition pursued some trials against them of minor importance:
according to Kamen, between 1615 and 1700, cases against Moriscos constituted
only 9 percent of those judged by the Inquisition. Demographic consequences. In
December 2008, a genetic study of the current population of the Iberian
Peninsula, published in the "American Journal of Human Genetics", estimated
that about 10% have North African ancestors and 20% have Sephardi Jews as
ancestors. Since there is no direct link between genetic makeup and religious
affiliation, however, it is difficult to draw direct conclusions between their
findings and forced or voluntary conversion. Nevertheless, the Sephardic result
is in contradiction or not replicated in all the body of genetic studies done
in Iberia and has been later questioned by the authors themselves and by
Stephen Oppenheimer who estimates that much earlier migrations, 5000 to 10,000
years ago from the Eastern Mediterranean might also have accounted for the
Sephardic estimates: "They are really assuming that they are looking at his
migration of Jewish immigrants, but the same lineages could have been
introduced in the Neolithic". The rest of genetic studies done in Spain
estimate the Moorish contribution ranging from 2.5/3.4% to 7.7%. Control of
Protestants. Despite much popular myth about the Spanish Inquisition relating
to Protestants, it dealt with very few cases involving actual Protestants, as
there were so few in Spain. The first of the trials against those labeled by
the Inquisition as "Lutheran" were those against the sect of mystics known as
the "Alumbrados" of Guadalajara and Valladolid. The trials were long, and ended
with prison sentences of differing lengths, though none of the sect were
executed. Nevertheless, the subject of the "Alumbrados" put the Inquisition on
the trail of many intellectuals and clerics who, interested in Erasmian ideas,
had strayed from orthodoxy (which is striking because both Charles I and Philip
II of Spain were confessed admirers of Erasmus). Such was the case with the
humanist Juan de Valdés, who was forced to flee to Italy to escape the process
that had been begun against him, and the preacher, Juan de Ávila, who spent
close to a year in prison. The first trials against Lutheran groups, as such,
took place between 1558 and 1562, at the beginning of the reign of Philip II,
against two communities of Protestants from the cities of Valladolid and
Seville numbering about 120. The trials signaled a notable intensification of
the Inquisition's activities. A number of "autos-da-fé" were held, some of
them presided over by members of the royal family and around 100 executions
took place. The "autos-da-fé" of the mid-century virtually put an end to
Spanish Protestantism which was, throughout, a small phenomenon to begin with.
After 1562, though the trials continued, the repression was much reduced,
According to Kamen, only about 200 Spaniards were accused of being Protestants
in the last decades of the 16th century. "Most of them were in no sense
Protestants...Irreligious sentiments, drunken mockery, anticlerical
expressions, were all captiously classified by the inquisitors (or by those who
denounced the cases) as ‘Lutheran.’ Disrespect to church images, and eating
meat on forbidden days, were taken as signs of heresy" and it is estimated that
a dozen Spaniards were burned alive. Censorship. As one manifestation of the
Counter-Reformation, the Spanish Inquisition worked actively to impede the
diffusion of heretical ideas in Spain by producing "Indexes" of prohibited
books. Such lists of prohibited books were common in Europe a decade before the
Inquisition published its first. The first Index published in Spain in 1551
was, in reality, a reprinting of the Index published by the University of
Louvain in 1550, with an appendix dedicated to Spanish texts. Subsequent
Indexes were published in 1559, 1583, 1612, 1632, and 1640. The Indexes
included an enormous number of books of all types, though special attention was
dedicated to religious works, and, particularly, vernacular translations of the
Bible. Included in the Indexes, at one point, were many of the great works of
Spanish literature. Also, a number of religious writers who are today
considered saints by the Catholic Church saw their works appear in the Indexes.
At first, this might seem counter-intuitive or even nonsensical—how were
these Spanish authors published in the first place if their texts were then
prohibited by the Inquisition and placed in the Index? The answer lies in the
process of publication and censorship in Early Modern Spain. Books in Early
Modern Spain faced prepublication licensing and approval (which could include
modification) by both secular and religious authorities. However, once approved
and published, the circulating text also faced the possibility of post-hoc
censorship by being denounced to the Inquisition—sometimes decades later.
Likewise, as Catholic theology evolved, once-prohibited texts might be removed
from the Index. At first, inclusion in the Index meant total prohibition of a
text; however, this proved not only impractical and unworkable, but also
contrary to the goals of having a literate and well-educated clergy. Works with
one line of suspect dogma would be prohibited in their entirety, despite the
remainder of the text's sound dogma. In time, a compromise solution was adopted
in which trusted Inquisition officials blotted out words, lines or whole
passages of otherwise acceptable texts, thus allowing these expurgated editions
to circulate. Although in theory the Indexes imposed enormous restrictions on
the diffusion of culture in Spain, some historians, such as Henry Kamen, argue
that such strict control was impossible in practice and that there was much
more liberty in this respect than is often believed. And Irving Leonard has
conclusively demonstrated that, despite repeated royal prohibitions, romances
of chivalry, such as Amadis of Gaul, found their way to the New World with the
blessing of the Inquisition. Moreover, with the coming of the Age of
Enlightenment in the 18th century, increasing numbers of licenses to possess
and read prohibited texts were granted. Despite repeated publication of the
Indexes and a large bureaucracy of censors, the activities of the Inquisition
did not impede the flowering of Spanish literature's "Siglo de Oro", although
almost all of its major authors crossed paths with the Holy Office at one point
or another. Among the Spanish authors included in the Index are: Bartolomé
Torres Naharro, Juan del Enzina, Jorge de Montemayor, Juan de Valdés and Lope
de Vega, as well as the anonymous Lazarillo de Tormes and the Cancionero
General by Hernando del Castillo. La Celestina, which was not included in the
Indexes of the 16th century, was expurgated in 1632 and prohibited in its
entirety in 1790. Among the non-Spanish authors prohibited were Ovid, Dante,
Rabelais, Ariosto, Machiavelli, Erasmus, Jean Bodin, Valentine Naibod and
Thomas More (known in Spain as Tomás Moro). One of the most outstanding and
best-known cases in which the Inquisition directly confronted literary activity
is that of Fray Luis de León, noted humanist and religious writer of converso
origin, who was imprisoned for four years (from 1572 to 1576) for having
translated the Song of Songs directly from Hebrew. Some scholars indicate that
one of the main effects of the inquisition was to end free thought and
scientific thought in Spain. As one contemporary Spanish in exile put it: "Our
country is a land of ... barbarism; down there one cannot produce any culture
without being suspected of heresy, error and Judaism. Thus silence was imposed
on the learned." For the next few centuries, while the rest of Europe was
slowly awakened by the influence of the Enlightenment, Spain stagnated.
However, this conclusion is contested. The censorship of books was actually
very ineffective, and prohibited books circulated in Spain without significant
problems. The Spanish Inquisition never persecuted scientists, and relatively
few scientific books were placed on the Index. On the other hand, Spain was a
state with more political freedom than in other absolute monarchies in the 16th
to 18th centuries. The backwardness of Spain in economy and science can hardly
be attributed to the Inquisition. Other offenses. Although the Inquisition was
created to suppress heresy, it also occupied itself with a wide variety of
offences that only indirectly could be related to religious heterodoxy. Of a
total of 49,092 trials from the period 1560–1700 registered in the archive of
the Suprema, appear the following: "judaizantes" (5,007); "moriscos" (11,311);
Lutherans (3,499); "alumbrados" (149); superstitions (3,750); heretical
propositions (14,319); bigamy (2,790); solicitation (1,241); offences against
the Holy Office of the Inquisition (3,954); miscellaneous (2,575). These data
demonstrate that not only New Christians ("conversos" of Jewish or Islamic
descent) and Protestants faced investigation, but also Old Christians could be
targeted for various reasons as well. Witchcraft. The category "superstitions"
includes trials related to witchcraft. The witch-hunt in Spain had much less
intensity than in other European countries (particularly France, Scotland, and
Germany). One remarkable case was that of Logroño, in which the witches of
Zugarramurdi in Navarre were persecuted. During the "auto-da-fé" that took
place in Logroño on November 7 and November 8, 1610, 6 people were burned and
another 5 burned in effigy. In general, nevertheless, the Inquisition
maintained a skeptical attitude towards cases of witchcraft, considering it as
a mere superstition without any basis. Alonso de Salazar Frías, who, after the
trials of Logroño took the Edict of Faith to various parts of Navarre, noted
in his report to the Suprema that, "There were neither witches nor bewitched in
a village until they were talked and written about". Blasphemy. Included under
the rubric of "heretical propositions" were verbal offences, from outright
blasphemy to questionable statements regarding religious beliefs, from issues
of sexual morality, to misbehaviour of the clergy. Many were brought to trial
for affirming that "simple fornication" (sex between unmarried persons) was not
a sin or for putting in doubt different aspects of Christian faith such as
Transubstantiation or the virginity of Mary. Also, members of the clergy itself
were occasionally accused of heretical propositions. These offences rarely lead
to severe penalties. Bigamy. The Inquisition also pursued offences against
morals, at times in open conflict with the jurisdictions of civil tribunals. In
particular, there were numerous trials for bigamy, a relatively frequent
offence in a society that only permitted divorce under the most extreme
circumstances. In the case of men, the penalty was five years service as an
oarsmen in a royal galley (tantamount to a death sentence). Women too were
accused of bigamy. Also, many cases of solicitation during confession were
adjudicated, indicating a strict vigilance over the clergy. Sodomy.
Inquisitorial repression of the sexual offence of sodomy, considered, according
to Canon Law, as a crime against nature, merits separate attention. This
included cases of incidences of heterosexual and homosexual anal sex, rape, and
separately bestiality. Civil authorities at times executed those convicted. In
1506 at Seville the Inquisition made a special investigation into sodomy,
causing many arrests and many fugitives and burning 12 persons, but in 1509 the
Suprema in Castile declared that crime not within the jurisdiction of the
Inquisition deciding that cases of sodomy could not be adjudicated, unless
related to heresy. Alleging that sodomy had been introduced to Spain by the
Moors, in 1524 the Spanish Ambassador to Rome obtained a special commission
from Clement VII for the Holy Office to curb its spread by investigating laymen
and clergy in the territories of Aragon, whether or not it was related to
heresy; and proceeding according to local, municipal law in spite of the
resistance by local bishops to this usurpation of their authority. The tribunal
of Zaragoza distinguished itself for its severity in judging these offences:
between 1571—1579, 101 men accused of sodomy were processed and at least 35
were executed. In total, between 1570 and 1630 there were 534 trials (incl. 187
for homosexuality, 245 for bestiality, and 111 with unknown specification of
the charges) with 102 executions (incl. 27 for homosexuality, 64 for bestiality
and 11 uncertain cases). The first sodomite was burned by the Inquisition in
Valencia in 1572, and those accused included 19% clergy, 6% nobles, 37%
workers, 19% servants, and 18% soldiers and sailors. A growing reluctance to
convict those who, unlike heretics, could not escape by confession and penance
led after 1630 to greater leniency. Torture decreased: in Valencia 21% of
sodomites were tortured prior to 1630, but only 4% afterwards. The last
execution "in persona" for sodomy by the Inquisition took place in Zaragoza in
April 1633. In total, out of about 1,000 convicted of sodomy - 170 were
actually burnt at the stake, including 84 condemned for bestiality and 75 for
homosexuality, with 11 cases where the exact character of the charges is not
known. Nearly all of almost 500 cases of sodomy between persons concerned the
relationship between an older man and an adolescent, often by coercion; with
only a few cases where the couple were consenting homosexual adults. About 100
of the total involved allegations of child abuse. Adolescents were generally
punished more leniently than adults, but only when they were very young (under
ca. 12 years) or when the case clearly concerned rape, did they have a chance
to avoid punishment altogether. As a rule, the Inquisition condemned to death
only those "sodomites" over the age of 25 years. As about half of those tried
were under this age, it explains the relatively small percent of death
sentences. Freemasonry. In 1815, Francisco Javier de Mier y Campillo, the
Inquisitor General of the Spanish Inquisition and the Bishop of Almería,
suppressed Freemasonry and denounced the lodges as "societies which lead to
atheism, to sedition and to all errors and crimes." He then instituted a purge
during which Spaniards could be arrested on the charge of being "suspected of
Freemasonry". Organization. Beyond its role in religious affairs, the
Inquisition was also an institution at the service of the monarchy. The
Inquisitor General, in charge of the Holy Office, was designated by the crown.
The Inquisitor General was the only public office whose authority stretched to
all the kingdoms of Spain (including the American viceroyalties), except for a
brief period (1507–1518) during which there were two Inquisitors General, one
in the kingdom of Castile, and the other in Aragon. The Inquisitor General
presided over the Council of the Supreme and General Inquisition (generally
abbreviated as "Council of the Suprema"), created in 1483, which was made up of
six members named directly by the crown (the number of members of the Suprema
varied over the course of the Inquisition's history, but it was never more than
10). Over time, the authority of the Suprema grew at the expense of the power
of the Inquisitor General. The Suprema met every morning, save for holidays,
and for two hours in the afternoon on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays. The
morning sessions were devoted to questions of faith, while the afternoons were
reserved for "minor heresies" cases of perceived unacceptable sexual behavior,
bigamy, witchcraft, etc. Below the Suprema were the different tribunals of the
Inquisition, which were, in their origins, itinerant, installing themselves
where they were necessary to combat heresy, but later being established in
fixed locations. In the first phase, numerous tribunals were established, but
the period after 1495 saw a marked tendency towards centralization. There were
only four tribunals in the kingdom of Aragon: Zaragoza and Valencia (1482),
Barcelona (1484), and Majorca (1488). Ferdinand the Catholic also established
the Spanish Inquisition in Sicily (1513), housed in Palermo and Sardinia, in
the town of Sassari. In the Americas, tribunals were established in Lima and in
Mexico City (1569) and, in 1610, in Cartagena de Indias (present day Colombia).
Composition of the tribunals. Initially, each of the tribunals included two
inquisitors, a "calificador", an "alguacil" (bailiff) and a "fiscal"
(prosecutor); new positions were added as the institution matured. The
inquisitors were preferably jurists more than theologians, and, in 1608, Philip
III even stipulated that all the inquisitors must have a background in law. The
inquisitors did not typically remain in the position for a long time: for the
Court of Valencia, for example, the average tenure in the position was about
two years. Most of the inquisitors belonged to the secular clergy (priests who
were not members of religious orders), and had a university education. The
"fiscal" was in charge of presenting the accusation, investigating the
denunciations and interrogating the witnesses by the use of physical and mental
torture. The "calificadores" were generally theologians; it fell to them to
determine if the defendant's conduct added up to a crime against the faith.
Consultants were expert jurists who advised the court in questions of
procedure. The court had, in addition, three secretaries: the "notario de
secuestros" (Notary of Property), who registered the goods of the accused at
the moment of his detention; the "notario del secreto" (Notary of the Secret),
who recorded the testimony of the defendant and the witnesses; and the
"escribano general" (General Notary), secretary of the court. The "alguacil"
was the executive arm of the court: he was responsible for detaining, jailing,
and physically torturing the defendant. Other civil employees were the
"nuncio", ordered to spread official notices of the court, and the "alcaide",
jailer in charge of feeding the prisoners. In addition to the members of the
court, two auxiliary figures existed that collaborated with the Holy Office:
the "familiares" and the "comissarios" (commissioners). "Familiares" were lay
collaborators of the Inquisition, who had to be permanently at the service of
the Holy Office. To become a familiar was considered an honour, since it was a
public recognition of "limpieza de sangre" — Old Christian status — and
brought with it certain additional privileges. Although many nobles held the
position, most of the "familiares" many came from the ranks of commoners. The
commissioners, on the other hand, were members of the religious orders who
collaborated occasionally with the Holy Office. One of the most striking
aspects of the organization of the Inquisition was its form of financing:
devoid of its own budget, the Inquisition depended exclusively on the
confiscation of the goods of the denounced. It is not surprising, therefore,
that many of those prosecuted were rich men. That the situation was open to
abuse is evident, as stands out in the memorial that a "converso" from Toledo
directed to Charles I: Cited in Kamen, op. cit., p. 151. Functioning of the
inquisition. Near the outset of the Inquisition, in a letter of April 14, 1482,
Pope Sixtus IV instructed the Spanish to ensure due process, allow legal
counsel and appeal to Rome. King Ferdinand defiantly rejected Papal control,
the Inquisition becoming thereafter a tool of the monarchy, rather than the
church. In 1483, Ferdinand made Torquemada the Inquisitor General of most areas
of Spain. Its procedures were set out in various "Instrucciones" issued by the
successive Inquisitors General, Torquemada, Deza, and Valdés. Accusation. When
the Inquisition arrived in a city, the first step was the "Edict of Grace".
Following the Sunday mass, the Inquisitor would proceed to read the edict; it
explained possible heresies and encouraged all the congregation to come to the
tribunals of the Inquisition to "relieve their consciences". They were called
"Edicts of Grace" because all of the self-incriminated who presented themselves
within a "period of grace" (usually ranging from thirty to forty days) were
offered the possibility of reconciliation with the Church without severe
punishment. The promise of benevolence was effective, and many voluntarily
presented themselves to the Inquisition and were often encouraged to denounce
others who had also committed offenses, informants being the Inquisition's
primary source of information. After about 1500, the Edicts of Grace were
replaced by the "Edicts of Faith", which left out the grace period and instead
encouraged the denunciation of those guilty. The denunciations were anonymous,
and the defendants had no way of knowing the identities of their accusers. This
was one of the points most criticized by those who opposed the Inquisition (for
example, the Cortes of Castile, in 1518). In practice, false denunciations were
frequent. Denunciations were made for a variety of reasons, from genuine
concern, to rivalries and personal jealousies. Detention. After a denunciation,
the case was examined by the "calificadores" (qualifiers), who had to determine
if there was heresy involved, followed by detention of the accused. In
practice, however, many were detained in preventive custody, and many cases of
lengthy incarcerations occurred, lasting up to two years, before the
"calificadores" examined the case. Detention of the accused entailed the
preventive sequestration of their property by the Inquisition. The property of
the prisoner was used to pay for procedural expenses and the accused's own
maintenance and costs. Often the relatives of the defendant found themselves in
outright misery. This situation was only remedied following instructions
written in 1561. The entire process was undertaken with the utmost secrecy, as
much for the public as for the accused, who were not informed about the
accusations that were levied against them. Months, or even years could pass
without the accused being informed about why they were imprisoned. The
prisoners remained isolated, and, during this time, the prisoners were not
allowed to attend Mass nor receive the sacraments. The jails of the Inquisition
were no worse than those of secular authorities, and there are even certain
testimonies that occasionally they were much better. The trial. The
inquisitorial process consisted of a series of hearings, in which both the
denouncers and the defendant gave testimony. A defense counsel was assigned to
the defendant, a member of the tribunal itself, whose role was simply to advise
the defendant and to encourage them to speak the truth. The prosecution was
directed by the "fiscal". Interrogation of the defendant was done in the
presence of the "Notary of the Secreto", who meticulously wrote down the words
of the accused. The archives of the Inquisition, in comparison to those of
other judicial systems of the era, are striking in the completeness of their
documentation. In order to defend themselves, the accused had two
possibilities: "abonos" (to find favourable witnesses, akin to "substantive"
evidence/testimony in Anglo-American law) or "tachas" (to demonstrate that the
witnesses of accusers were not trustworthy, akin to Anglo-American
"impeachment" evidence/testimony). In order to interrogate the accused, the
Inquisition made use of torture, but not in a systematic way. It was applied
mainly against those suspected of Judaism and Protestantism, beginning in the
16th century. For example, Lea estimates that between 1575 and 1610 the court
of Toledo tortured approximately a third of those processed for heresy. In
other periods, the proportions varied remarkably. Torture was always a means to
obtain the confession of the accused, not a punishment itself. Torture was also
applied without distinction of sex or age, including children and the aged.
Torture. As with all European tribunals of the time, torture was employed. The
Spanish inquisition, however, engaged in it far less often and with greater
care than other courts. Historian Henry Kamen contends that some "popular"
accounts of the inquisition (those that describe scenes of uncontrolled
sadistic torture) are not based in truth. Kamen argues that torture was only
ever used to elicit information or a confession, not for punitive reasons.
Modern scholars have determined that torture was used in two percent of the
cases, and in less than one percent of the cases was it used a second time,
never more than that. The torture lasted up to 15 minutes. Although the
Inquisition was technically forbidden from permanently harming or drawing
blood, this still allowed for methods of torture. The methods most used, and
common in other secular and ecclesiastical tribunals, were "garrucha", "toca"
and the "potro". The application of the "garrucha", also known as the
strappado, consisted of suspending the victim from the ceiling by the wrists,
which are tied behind the back. Sometimes weights were tied to the ankles, with
a series of lifts and drops, during which the arms and legs suffered violent
pulls and were sometimes dislocated. The "toca", also called "interrogatorio
mejorado del agua", consisted of introducing a cloth into the mouth of the
victim, and forcing them to ingest water spilled from a jar so that they had
the impression of drowning (see: waterboarding). The "potro", the rack, was the
instrument of torture used most frequently. The assertion that "confessionem
esse veram, non factam vi tormentorum" (literally: ((a person's)) confession is
truth, not made by way of torture.) sometimes follows a description of how,
after torture had ended, the subject freely confessed to the offenses. Thus,
all confession acquired by means of torture were considered completely valid as
they were supposedly made of the confessor's own free will. Once the process
concluded, the inquisidores met with a representative of the bishop and with
the "consultores", experts in theology or Canon Law, which was called the
"consulta de fe". The case was voted and sentence pronounced, which had to be
unanimous. In case of discrepancies, the "Suprema" had to be informed.
According to authorities within the Eastern Orthodox Church, there was at least
one casualty tortured by those "Jesuits" (though most likely, Franciscans) who
administered the Spanish Inquisition in North America: St. Peter the Aleut.
Sentencing. Frequently, cases were judged "in absentia", and when the accused
died before the trial finished, the condemned were burned in effigy. The
distribution of the punishments varied considerably over time. It is believed
that sentences of death were enforced in the first stages within the long
history of the Inquisition. According to García Cárcel, the court of Valencia
employed the death penalty in 40% of the processings before 1530, but later
that percentage dropped to 3%). The "autos-da-fé". If the sentence was
condemnatory, this implied that the condemned had to participate in the
ceremony of an auto de fe (more commonly known in English as an "auto-da-fé"),
that solemnized their return to the Church (in most cases), or punishment as an
impenitent heretic. The "autos-da-fé" could be private ("auto particular") or
public ("auto publico" or "auto general"). Although initially the public
"autos" did not have any special solemnity nor sought a large attendance of
spectators, with time they became solemn ceremonies, celebrated with large
public crowds, amidst a festive atmosphere. The "auto-da-fé" eventually became
a baroque spectacle, with staging meticulously calculated to cause the greatest
effect among the spectators. The "autos" were conducted in a large public space
(in the largest plaza of the city, frequently), generally on holidays. The
rituals related to the "auto" began the previous night (the "procession of the
Green Cross") and sometimes lasted the whole day. The "auto-da-fé" frequently
was taken to the canvas by painters: one of the better known examples is the
painting by Francesco Rizzi held by the Prado Museum in Madrid and which
represents the "auto" celebrated in the Plaza Mayor of Madrid on June 30, 1680.
The last public "auto-da-fé" took place in 1691. The "auto-da-fé" involved: a
Catholic Mass; prayer; a public procession of those found guilty; and a reading
of their sentences (Peters 1988: 93-94). They took place in public squares or
esplanades and lasted several hours: ecclesiastical and civil authorities
attended. Artistic representations of the "auto-da-fé" usually depict torture
and the burning at the stake. However, this type of activity never took place
during an "auto-da-fé", which was in essence a religious act. Torture was not
administered after a trial concluded, and executions were always held after and
separate from the "auto-da-fé" (Kamen 1997: 192-213), though in the minds and
experiences of observers and those undergoing the confession and execution, the
separation of the two might be experienced as merely a technicality. The first
recorded "auto-da-fé" was held in Paris in 1242, during the reign of Louis IX.
However, the first Spanish "auto-da-fé" did not take place until Seville in
1481; six of the men and women subjected to this first religious ritual were
later executed. The Inquisition had limited power in Portugal, having been
established in 1536 and officially lasting until 1821, although its influence
was much weakened with the government of the Marquis of Pombal in the second
half of the 18th century. "Autos-da-fé" also took place in Mexico, Brazil and
Peru: contemporary historians of the Conquistadors such as Bernal Díaz del
Castillo record them. They also took place in the Portuguese colony of Goa,
India, following the establishment of Inquisition there in 1562–1563. The
arrival of the Enlightenment in Spain slowed inquisitorial activity. In the
first half of the 18th century, 111 were condemned to be burned in person, and
117 in effigy, most of them for judaizing. In the reign of Philip V, there were
125 "autos-da-fé", while in the reigns of Charles III and Charles IV only 44.
Cited in Elorza, "La Inquisición y el pensamiento ilustrado." Historia 16.
Especial 10º Aniversario "La Inquisición"; p. 81. In its new role, the
Inquisition tried to accentuate its function of censoring publications, but
found that Charles III had secularized censorship procedures and, on many
occasions, the authorization of the Council of Castile hit the more
intransigent position of the Inquisition. Since the Inquisition itself was an
arm of the state, being within the Council of Castile, civil, rather than
ecclesiastical, censorship usually prevailed. This loss of influence can also
be explained because the foreign Enlightenment texts entered the peninsula
through prominent members of the nobility or government, influential people
with whom it was very difficult to interfere. Thus, for example, Diderot's
Encyclopedia entered Spain thanks to special licenses granted by the king.
Elorza, "La Inquisición y el pensamiento ilustrado." p. 84. However,
inquisitorial activity was impossible in the face of the information avalanche
that crossed the border; in 1792 the multitude of seditious papers... does not
allow formalizing the files against those who introduce them... The fight from
within against the Inquisition was almost always clandestine. The first texts
that questioned the Inquisition and praised the ideas of Voltaire or
Montesquieu appeared in 1759. After the suspension of pre-publication
censorship on the part of the Council of Castile in 1785, the newspaper "El
Censor" began the publication of protests against the activities of the Holy
Office by means of a rationalist critique and, even, Valentin de Foronda
published "Espíritu de los Mejores Diarios", a plea in favour of freedom of
expression that was avidly read in the salons. Also, Manuel de Aguirre, in the
same vein, wrote, On Toleration in "El Censor", "El Correo de los Ciegos" and
"El Diario de Madrid". End of the Inquisition. During the reign of Charles IV
of Spain, in spite of the fears that the French Revolution provoked, several
events took place that accelerated the decline of the Inquisition. In the first
place, the state stopped being a mere social organizer and began to worry about
the well-being of the public. As a result, they considered the land-holding
power of the Church, in the "señoríos" and, more generally, in the
accumulated wealth that had prevented social progress. On the other hand, the
perennial struggle between the power of the throne and the power of the Church,
inclined more and more to the former, under which, Enlightenment thinkers found
better protection for their ideas. Manuel Godoy and Antonio Alcalá Galiano
were openly hostile to an institution whose only role had been reduced to
censorship and was the very embodiment of the Spanish Black Legend,
internationally, and was not suitable to the political interests of the moment:
Elorza, "La Inquisición y el Pensamiento Ilustrado". Historia 16. Especial
10º Aniversario "La Inquisición"; pg. 88 The Inquisition was abolished during
the domination of Napoleon and the reign of Joseph Bonaparte (1808–1812). In
1813, the liberal deputies of the Cortes of Cádiz also obtained its abolition,
largely as a result of the Holy Office's condemnation of the popular revolt
against French invasion. But the Inquisition was reconstituted when Ferdinand
VII recovered the throne on July 1, 1814. It was again abolished during the
three year Liberal interlude known as the Trienio liberal. Later, during the
period known as the Ominous Decade, the Inquisition was not formally re-
established, although, "de facto", it returned under the so-called Meetings of
Faith, tolerated in the dioceses by King Ferdinand. These had the dubious
honour of executing the last heretic condemned, the school teacher Cayetano
Ripoll, garroted in Valencia on July 26, 1826 (presumably for having taught
deist principles), all amongst a European-wide scandal at the despotic attitude
still prevailing in Spain. Juan Antonio Llorente, who had been the
Inquisition's general secretary in 1789, became a Bonapartist and published a
critical history in 1817 from his French exile, based on his privileged access
to its archives. The Inquisition was definitively abolished on July 15, 1834,
by a Royal Decree signed by regent Maria Christina of the Two Sicilies,
Ferdinand VII's liberal widow, during the minority of Isabella II and with the
approval of the President of the Cabinet Francisco Martínez de la Rosa. (It is
possible that something similar to the Inquisition acted during the 1833–1839
First Carlist War, in the zones dominated by the Carlists, since one of the
government measures praised by Conde de Molina Carlos Maria Isidro de Borbon
was the re-implementation of the Inquisition to protect the Church). During the
Carlist Wars it was the conservatives who fought the liberals who wanted to
reduce the Church's power, amongst other reforms to liberalize the economy. It
can be added that Franco during the Spanish Civil War is alleged to have stated
that he would attempt to reintroduce it, possibly as a sop to Vatican approval
of his coup. The Alhambra Decree that had expelled the Jews was formally
rescinded on December 16, 1968. Outcomes. Confiscations. It is unknown exactly
how much wealth was confiscated from converted Jews and others tried by the
Inquisition. Wealth confiscated in one year of persecution in the small town of
Guadaloupe paid the costs of building a royal residence. There are numerous
records of the opinion of ordinary Spaniards of the time that "the Inquisition
was devised simply to rob people". "They were burnt only for the money they
had", a resident of Cuenca averred. "They burn only the well-off", said
another. In 1504 an accused stated, "only the rich were burnt". …In
1484…Catalina de Zamora was accused of asserting that "this Inquisition that
the fathers are carrying out is as much for taking property from the conversos
as for defending the faith. It is the goods that are the heretics." This saying
passed into common usage in Spain. In 1524 a treasurer informed Charles V that
his predessor had received ten million ducats from the conversos, but the
figure is unverified. In 1592 an inquisitor admitted that most of the fifty
women he arrested were rich. In 1676, the Suprema claimed it had confiscated
over 700,000 ducats for the royal treasury (which was paid money only after the
Inquisition's own budget, amounting in one known case to only 5%). The property
on Mallorca alone in 1678 was worth "well over 2,500,000 ducats". Death tolls.
García Cárcel estimates that the total number processed by the Inquisition
throughout its history was approximately 150,000; applying the percentages of
executions that appeared in the trials of 1560–1700—about 2%—the
approximate total would be about 3,000 put to death. Nevertheless, very
probably this total should be raised keeping in mind the data provided by
Dedieu and García Cárcel for the tribunals of Toledo and Valencia,
respectively. It is likely that the total would be between 3,000 and 5,000
executed. Modern historians have begun to study the documentary records of the
Inquisition. The archives of the Suprema, today held by the National Historical
Archive of Spain (Archivo Histórico Nacional), conserves the annual relations
of all processes between 1540 and 1700. This material provides information on
about 44,674 judgements, the latter studied by Gustav Henningsen and Jaime
Contreras. These 44,674 cases include 826 executions "in persona" and 778 "in
effigie". This material, however, is far from being complete—for example, the
tribunal of Cuenca is entirely omitted, because no "relaciones de causas" from
this tribunal have been found, and significant gaps concern some other
tribunals (e.g. Valladolid). Many more cases not reported to the Suprema are
known from the other sources (e.g. no "relaciones de causas" from Cuenca have
been found, but its original records have been preserved), but were not
included in Contreras-Henningsen's statistics for the methodological reasons.
William Monter estimates 1000 executions between 1530–1630 and 250 between
1630–1730. The archives of the Suprema only provide information surrounding
the processes prior to 1560. To study the processes themselves, it is necessary
to examine the archives of the local tribunals; however, the majority have been
lost to the devastation of war, the ravages of time or other events. Jean-
Pierre Dedieu has studied those of Toledo, where 12,000 were judged for
offences related to heresy. Ricardo García Cárcel has analyzed those of the
tribunal of Valencia. These authors' investigations find that the Inquisition
was most active in the period between 1480 and 1530, and that during this
period the percentage condemned to death was much more significant than in the
years studied by Henningsen and Contreras. Henry Kamen gives the number of
about 2,000 executions "in persona" in the whole Spain up to 1530.
Historiography. How historians and commentators have viewed the Spanish
Inquisition has changed over time, and continues to be a source of controversy
to this day. Before and during the 19th century historical interest focused on
who was being persecuted. In the early and mid 20th century historians examined
the specifics of what happened and how it influenced Spanish history. In the
later 20th and 21st century, historians have re-examined how severe the
Inquisition really was, calling into question some of the conclusions made
earlier in the 20th century. 19th to early 20th century scholarship. Before the
rise of professional historians in the 19th century, the Spanish Inquisition
had largely been studied and portrayed by Protestant scholars who saw it as the
archetypal symbol of Catholic intolerance and ecclesiastical power. The Spanish
Inquisition for them was largely associated with the persecution of
Protestants. The 19th century professional historians, including the Spanish
scholar Amador de los Rios, were the first to challenge this perception and
look seriously at the role of Jews and Muslims. At the start of the 20th
century Henry Charles Lea published the groundbreaking "History of the
Inquisition in Spain". This influential work saw the Spanish Inquisition as "an
engine of immense power, constantly applied for the furtherance of
obscurantism, the repression of thought, the exclusion of foreign ideas and the
obstruction of progress." Lea documented the Inquisition's methods and modes of
operation in no uncertain terms, calling it "theocratic absolutism" at its
worst. In the context of the polarization between Protestants and Catholics
during the second half of the 19th century, some of Lea's contemporaries, as
well as most modern scholars thought Lea's work had an anti-Catholic bias.
William H. Prescott, the Boston historian, likened the Inquisition to an "eye
that never slumbered". Starting in the 1920s, Jewish scholars picked up where
Lea's work left off. Yitzhak Baer's "History of the Jews in Christian Spain",
Cecil Roth's "History of the Marranos" and, after World War II, the work of
Haim Beinart who for the first time published trial transcripts of cases
involving conversos. Revision after 1960. One of the first books to challenge
the classical view was "The Spanish Inquisition" (1965) by Henry Kamen. Kamen
purported that the Inquisition was not nearly as cruel or as powerful as
commonly believed. The book was very influential and largely responsible for
subsequent studies in the 1970s to try to quantify (from archival records) the
Inquisition's activities from 1480 to 1834. Those studies showed there was an
initial burst of activity against conversos suspected of relapsing into
Judaism, and a mid-16th century pursuit of Protestants, but the Inquisition
served principally as a forum Spaniards occasionally used to humiliate and
punish people they did not like: blasphemers, bigamists, foreigners and, in
Aragon, homosexuals and horse smugglers. There were so few Protestants in Spain
that widespread persecution of Protestantism was not physically possible. Kamen
went on to publish two more books in 1985 and 2006 that incorporated new
findings, further supporting the view that the Inquisition was not as bad as
once described by Lea and others. Along similar lines is Edward Peters's
"Inquisition" (1988). One of the most important works in challenging
traditional views of the Inquisition as it related to the Jewish conversos or
New Christians, was "The Origins of the Inquisition in Fifteenth Century Spain"
by Benzion Netanyahu. It challenged the view that most conversos were actually
practicing Judaism in secret and were persecuted for their crypto-Judaism.
Rather, according to Netanyahu, the persecution was fundamentally racial, and
was a matter of envy of their success in Spanish society.
