The Rape of Nanking (book) The Rape of Nanking: The Forgotten Holocaust of
World War II is a bestselling 1997 non-fiction book written by Iris Chang about
the 1937–1938 Nanking Massacre, the massacre and atrocities committed by the
Imperial Japanese Army after it captured Nanjing, then capital of China, during
the Second Sino-Japanese War. It describes the events leading up to the Nanking
Massacre and the atrocities that were committed. The book presents the view
that the Japanese government has not done enough to redress the atrocities. It
is one of the first major English-language books to introduce the Nanking
Massacre to Western and Eastern readers alike, and has been translated into
several languages. The book was a source of fame for Chang but was also
controversial; it was received with both acclaim and criticism by the public
and by academics. It has been praised as a work that "shows more clearly than
any previous account" the extent and brutality of the episode, while at the
same time it was criticized as "seriously flawed" and "full of misinformation
and harebrained explanations". Chang's research on the book was credited with
the finding of the diaries of John Rabe and Minnie Vautrin, both of whom played
important roles in the Nanking Safety Zone, a designated area in Nanjing that
protected Chinese civilians during the Nanking Massacre. The book prompted AOL
executive Ted Leonsis to fund and produce "Nanking", a 2007 documentary film
about the Nanking Massacre. Inspiration. When Iris Chang was a child, she was
told by her immigrant parents, who had escaped from China via Taiwan to the
United States during World War II, that during the Nanking Massacre, the
Japanese "sliced babies not just in half but in thirds and fourths". In the
introduction of "The Rape of Nanking", she wrote that throughout her childhood,
the Nanking Massacre "remained buried in the back of mind as a metaphor for
unspeakable evil". When she searched the local public libraries in her school
and found nothing, she wondered why nobody had written a book about it. The
subject of the Nanking Massacre entered Chang's life again almost two decades
later when she learned of producers who had completed documentary films about
it. One of the producers was Shao Tzuping, who helped produce "Magee's
Testament", a film that contains footage of the Nanking Massacre itself, shot
by the missionary John Magee. The other producer was Nancy Tong, who, together
with Christine Choy, produced and co-directed "In The Name of the Emperor", a
film containing a series of interviews with Chinese, American, and Japanese
citizens. Chang began talking to Shao and Tong, and soon she was connected to a
network of activists who felt the need to document and publicize the Nanking
Massacre. In December 1994, she attended a conference on the Nanking Massacre,
held in Cupertino, California, and what she saw and heard at the conference
motivated her to write "The Rape of Nanking". As she wrote in the introduction
to the book, while she was at the conference, she was "suddenly in a panic that
this terrifying disrespect for death and dying, this reversion in human social
evolution, would be reduced to a footnote of history, treated like a harmless
glitch in a computer program that might or might not again cause a problem,
unless someone forced the world to remember it". Research. Chang spent two
years on research for the book. She found that raw source materials were
available in the US, contained in the diaries, films, and photographs of
American missionaries, journalists, and military officers who were in Nanjing
at the time of the Nanking Massacre. Additionally, she traveled to Nanjing to
interview survivors of the Nanking Massacre and to read Chinese accounts and
confessions by Japanese army veterans. Chang did not, however, conduct research
in Japan, and this left her vulnerable to criticisms on how she portrayed
modern Japan in the context of how it deals with its World War II past. Chang's
research led her to make what one "San Francisco Chronicle" article called
"significant discoveries" on the subject of the Nanking Massacre, in the forms
of the diaries of two Westerners that were in Nanjing leading efforts to save
lives during the Japanese invasion. One diary was that of John Rabe, a German
Nazi Party member who was the leader of the Nanking Safety Zone, a
demilitarized zone in Nanjing that Rabe and other Westerners set up to protect
Chinese civilians. The other diary belonged to Minnie Vautrin, the American
missionary who saved the lives of about 10,000 women and children when she
provided them with shelter in Ginling College. The diaries documented the
events of the Nanking Massacre from the perspectives of their writers, and
provided detailed accounts of atrocities that they saw, as well as information
surrounding the circumstances of the Nanking Safety Zone. Chang dubbed Rabe the
"Oskar Schindler of Nanking" and Vautrin the "Anne Frank of Nanking". Rabe's
diary is over 800 pages, and contains one of the most detailed accounts of the
Nanking Massacre. Translated into English, it was published in 1998 by Random
House as '. Vautrin's diary recounts her personal experience and feelings on
the Nanking Massacre; in it, an entry reads, "There probably is no crime that
has not been committed in this city today." It was used as source material by
Hua-ling Hu for a biography of Vautrin and her role during the Nanking
Massacre, entitled '. The book. "The Rape of Nanking" is structured into three
main parts. The first uses a technique that Chang called "the Rashomon
perspective" to narrate the events of the Nanking Massacre, from three
different perspectives: that of the Japanese military, the Chinese victims, and
the Westerners who tried to help Chinese civilians. The second part concerns
the postwar reaction to the massacre, especially that of the American and
European governments. The third part of the book examines the circumstances
that, Chang believed, have kept knowledge of the massacre out of public
consciousness decades after the war. Atrocities. The book depicted in detail
the killing, torture, and rape that occurred during the Nanking Massacre. Chang
listed and described the kinds of torture that were visited upon the residents,
including live burials, mutilation, "death by fire", "death by ice", and "death
by dogs". Based on the testimony of a survivor of the massacre, Chang also
described a killing contest amongst a group of Japanese soldiers to determine
who could kill the fastest. On the rape that occurred during the massacre,
Chang wrote that "certainly it was one of the greatest mass rapes in world
history." She estimated that the number of women raped ranged from 20,000 to as
many as 80,000, and stated that women from all classes were raped, including
Buddhist nuns. Furthermore, rape occurred in all locations and at all hours,
and both very young and very old women were raped. Not even pregnant women were
spared, Chang wrote, and that after gang rape, Japanese soldiers "sometimes
slashed open the bellies of pregnant women and ripped out the fetuses for
amusement". Not all rape victims were women, according to the book, Chinese men
were sodomized and forced to perform repulsive sexual acts. Some were forced to
commit incest—fathers to rape their own daughters, brothers their sisters,
sons their mothers. Death toll. Chang wrote of the death toll estimates given
by different sources; Chinese military specialist Liu Fang-chu proposed a
figure of 430,000, officials at the Nanjing Massacre Memorial Hall and the
procurator of the District Court of Nanjing in 1946 stated at least 300,000
were killed, the International Military Tribunal for the Far East (IMTFE)
judges concluded that more than 260,000 people were killed, Japanese historian
Fujiwara Akira approximated 200,000, John Rabe, who "never conducted a
systematic count and left Nanking in February", estimated only 50,000 to
60,000, and Japanese author Ikuhiko Hata argued the number killed was between
38,000 and 42,000. The book discussed the research of historian Sun Zhaiwei of
the Jiangsu Academy of Social Sciences. In his 1990 paper, "The Nanking
Massacre and the Nanking Population", Sun estimated the total number of people
killed at 377,400. Using Chinese burial records, he calculated that the number
of dead exceeded the figure of 227,400. He then added estimates totaling
150,000 given by Japanese Imperial Army Major Ohta Hisao in a confessional
report about the Japanese army's disposal efforts of dead bodies, arriving at
the sum of 377,400 dead. Chang wrote that there is "compelling evidence" that
the Japanese themselves, at the time, believed that the death toll may have
been as high as 300,000. She cited a message that Japan's foreign minister
Kōki Hirota relayed to his contacts in Washington, DC in the first month of
the massacre on January 17, 1938. The message acknowledged that "not less than
three hundred thousand Chinese civilians slaughtered, many cases in cold
blood." Acclaim. "The Rape of Nanking" sold more than half a million copies
when it was first published in the U. S., and according to "The New York
Times", received general critical acclaim. Iris Chang became an instant
celebrity in the U. S.; she was awarded honorary degrees, invited to give
lectures and to discuss the Nanking Massacre on shows such as "Good Morning
America", "Nightline", and "The NewsHour with Jim Lehrer", and was profiled by
"The New York Times" and featured on the cover of "Reader's Digest". The book
was on the "New York Times Best Seller list for 10 weeks and sold more than
125,000 copies in four months. Hillary Clinton invited her to the White House,
U. S. historian Stephen Ambrose described her as "maybe the best young
historian we've got", and the Organization of Chinese Americans named her
National Woman of the Year. The book's popularity prompted a lengthy book tour,
with Chang visiting 65 cities in over a year and a half. The book received
praise from news media. "The Wall Street Journal" wrote that it was the "first
comprehensive examination of the destruction of this Chinese imperial city",
and that Chang "skillfully excavated from oblivion the terrible events that
took place". "The Atlantic Monthly" described the book as "a crushing
indictment of the Japanese army's behavior". The "Chicago Tribune" called it "a
powerful new work of history and moral inquiry" and stated that "Chang takes
great care to establish an accurate accounting of the dimensions of the
violence." "The Philadelphia Inquirer" wrote that it was a "compelling account
of a horrendous episode that, until recently, has been largely forgotten", and
that "animals do not behave the way the Japanese troops of the Imperial Army
behaved." According to William C. Kirby, Professor of History at Harvard
University, Chang "shows more clearly than any previous account just what
Japanese did", and that she "draws connections between the slaughter in Europe
and in Asia of millions of innocents during World War II". Ross Terrill, an
associate in research at the Fairbank Center for East Asian Research at Harvard
University, wrote that the book is "scholarly, an exciting investigation and a
work of passion". Beatrice S. Bartlett, Emeritus Professor of History at Yale
University, wrote, "Iris Chang's research on the Nanking holocaust yields a new
and expanded telling of this World War II atrocity and reflects thorough
research." Criticism.  Jeans continued what he calls "giving the lie to Iris
Chang's generalizations about 'the Japanese'" by discussing the clashing
interest groups within Japanese society over such things as museums, textbooks,
and war memory. Robert Entenmann, professor of history at St. Olaf College,
criticized the work on the grounds that the "Japanese historical background
Chang presents is clichéd, simplistic, stereotyped, and often inaccurate." On
Chang's treatment of modern Japanese reaction to the massacre, he writes that
Chang seemed "unable to differentiate between some members of the
ultranationalist fringe and other Japanese", and that "her own ethnic prejudice
implicitly pervades her book." Stating that Chang's description of the massacre
is "open to criticism", Entenmann further commented that Chang "does not
adequately explain why the massacre occurred". Timothy M. Kelly, professor at
Edogawa University, described Chang's work as exhibiting "simple carelessness,
sheer sloppiness, historical inaccuracies, and shameless plagiarism." Kelly
further criticized Chang for her "lack of attention to detail". Finally, Kelly
charged that Chang had plagiarized passages and an illustration from "Japan's
Imperial Conspiracy" by David Bergamini. Kennedy criticized Chang's accusation
of "Western indifference" and "Japanese denial" of the massacre as
"exaggerated", commenting that "the Western world in fact neither then nor
later ignored the Rape of Nanking", "nor is Chang entirely correct that Japan
has obstinately refused to acknowledge its wartime crimes, let alone express
regret for them." Chang argues that Japan "remains to this day a renegade
nation," having "managed to avoid the moral judgment of the civilized world
that the Germans were made to accept for their actions in this nightmare time."
However, according to Kennedy, this accusation has already become a cliché of
Western criticism of Japan, most notably exemplified by Ian Buruma's "The Wages
of Guilt" (1994), whose general thesis might be summarized as "Germany
remembers too much, Japan too little." Kennedy pointed out that a vocal
Japanese left has long kept the memory of Nanking alive, noting the 1995
resolution of Japan's House of Councillors that expressed "deep remorse"
("fukai hansei") for the suffering that Japan inflicted on other peoples during
World War II and clear apologies ("owabi") for Imperial Japan's offenses
against other nations from two Japanese Prime Ministers. Sonni Efron of the
"Los Angeles Times" warned that the bitter row over Iris Chang's book may leave
Westerners with the "misimpression" that little has been written in Japan about
the Nanjing Massacre, when in fact the National Diet Library holds at least 42
books about the Nanjing massacre and Japan's wartime misdeeds, 21 of which were
written by liberals investigating Japan's wartime atrocities. In addition,
Efron noted that geriatric Japanese soldiers have published their memoirs and
have been giving speeches and interviews in increasing numbers, recounting the
atrocities they committed or witnessed. After years of government-enforced
denial, Japanese middle school textbooks now carry accounts of the Nanjing
massacre as accepted truth. Fogel also writes: "Dozens of Japanese scholars are
now actively engaged in research on every aspect of the war... Indeed, we know
many details of the Nanjing massacre, Japanese sexual exploitation of 'comfort
women,' and biological and chemical warfare used in China because of the
trailblazing research" of Japanese scholars. "San Francisco Chronicle" staff
writer Charles Burress wrote that Chang's quote of a secret telegram sent by
Japan's foreign minister in 1938 was incorrectly cited as "compelling evidence"
that Japanese troops killed at least 300,000 Chinese civilians in Nanjing.
According to Burress, the figure of 300,000 Chinese civilians killed actually
came from a message sent by a British reporter, concerning deaths not only in
Nanjing but in other places as well. Additionally, Burress questioned Chang's
motivation for writing the book - whether she wrote it as an activist or as a
historian, stating that the book "draws its emotional impetus" from her
conviction to not let the Nanking Massacre be forgotten by the world. Burress
also cited Ikuhiko Hata, a Japanese history professor at Nihon University, who
argued that 11 photos in the book were misrepresented or fake. One particular
photo shows women and children walking across a bridge with Japanese soldiers,
and captioned as "The Japanese rounded up thousands of women. Most were gang-
raped or forced into military prostitution." Hata stated that the photo
originally appeared in 1937 in a Japanese newspaper as part of a series of
photos that showed peaceful scenes of Chinese villagers under Japanese
occupation. Chang responded to Charles Burress's criticism in a letter written
to the "San Francisco Chronicle", but the letter was not published by the
newspaper. In the letter, she offered criticism of her own concerning Burress's
article. Chang found a "disturbing tendency" by Burress to quote right-wing
Japanese critics "without demanding evidence to back up their allegations". She
argued that Ikuhiko Hata, a source cited by Burress, was not "regarded as a
serious scholar" in either Japan or in the U. S., because he was a regular
contributor to "ultra right-wing" Japanese publications. One such publication
had published an article from a Holocaust denier that argued that no gas
chambers were used in Germany to kill Jews. This caused the parent publisher to
shut down the publication. On Burress's criticism of her inaccurate photo
captioning, Chang disputed the contention that the caption was wrong. She wrote
that her book dealt with the "horror of the Japanese invasion of China", and
that the caption reading "The Japanese rounded up thousands of women. Most were
gang-raped or forced into military prostitution" contained two statements of
indisputable fact. Chang also issued a rejoinder to Burress's argument that she
incorrectly cited a telegram sent by Japan's foreign minister. She wrote that
while the original figure of 300,000 Chinese civilian deaths in Nanjing was
reported by a British reporter, this figure was cited in a message that Japan's
foreign minister sent to his contacts in Washington, DC. Chang argued that
figure's use by a high-ranking Japanese government official was evidence that
the Japanese government recognized 300,000 as the number of Chinese civilian
deaths. Finally, she criticized Burress for his "nitpick" of small details in
order to draw attention away from the scope and magnitude of the Nanking
Massacre, writing that such was a "common tactic" of Holocaust deniers.
Reaction in Japan. "The Rape of Nanking" has caused controversy in Japan. "Los
Angeles Times" staff writer, Sonni Efron, reported that Chang was also
criticized by both Japanese "ultranationalists", who believe that the massacre
in Nanjing never took place, and Japanese liberals, who "insist the massacre
happened but allege that Chang's flawed scholarship damages their cause".
Associate Professor David Askew of Ritsumeikan Asia Pacific University stated
that Chang's work dealt a "severe blow" to the "Great Massacre School" of
thought, which advocates for the validity of the findings at the Tokyo Trials,
the tribunal convened to try the leaders of the Empire of Japan for crimes
committed during World War II. Askew further argued that "the Great Massacre
School has thus been forced into the (unusual) position of criticising a work
that argues for a larger death toll." Following the publication of "The Rape of
Nanking", Japanese critic Masaaki Tanaka had his 1987 book on Nanking
translated into English. Entitled "What Really Happened in Nanking: The
Refutation of a Common Myth", Tanaka stated in his introduction "I am convinced
that researchers will arrive at the realization that violations of
international law of the magnitude alleged by Iris Chang in "The Rape of
Nanking" (more than 300,000 murders and 80,000 rapes) never took place."
Chang's book was not published in a translated Japanese language edition until
December 2007. Problems with translation efforts surfaced immediately after a
contract was signed for the Japanese publishing of the book. A Japanese
literary agency informed Chang that several Japanese historians declined to
review the translation, and that one professor backed out because of pressure
placed on his family from "an unknown organization". According to Japan scholar
Ivan P. Hall, revisionist historians in Japan organized a committee of right-
wing scholars to condemn the book with repeated appearances at the Foreign
Correspondents' Club in Tokyo and throughout Japan. They prevailed on Kashiwa
Shobo, the contracted Japanese publisher of the book, to insist that Chang edit
the book for "corrections" they wanted made, to delete photographs and alter
maps, and to publish a rebuttal to Chang's book. Chang disagreed with the
changes and, as a result, withdrew the Japanese publishing of the book. The
rebuttal piece was nonetheless published as a book by Nobukatsu Fujioka and
Shudo Higashinakano entitled "A Study of 'The Rape of Nanking'". Shudo
Higashinakano, a professor of intellectual history at Asia University of Japan,
argued in "Sankei Shimbun" that the book was "pure baloney", that there was "no
witness of illegal executions or murders", and that "there existed no 'Rape of
Nanking' as alleged by the Tokyo Trial." He identified 90 historical factual
errors in the first 64 pages of the book, some of which were corrected in the
1998 Penguin Books edition. Chang's death. The book was the main source of fame
for Iris Chang, who was well respected in China for raising awareness of the
Nanking Massacre in the Western world. At the same time, Chang received hate
mail, primarily from Japanese ultranationalists, threatening notes on her car
and believed her phone was tapped. She responded overwhelmingly to any question
of the validity of her work. Her mother said the book "made Iris sad".
Suffering from depression, Chang was diagnosed with "brief reactive psychosis"
in August 2004. She began taking medications to stabilize her mood. She wrote:
"I can never shake my belief that I was being recruited, and later persecuted,
by forces more powerful than I could have imagined. Whether it was the CIA or
some other organization I will never know. As long as I am alive, these forces
will never stop hounding me." Succumbing to her battle with depression, Chang
took her own life November 9, 2004. A memorial service was held in China by
Nanking Massacre survivors coinciding with her funeral in Los Altos California.
The Memorial Hall of the Victims in the Nanjing Massacre, a memorial site in
Nanjing built to commemorate the victims of the Nanking Massacre, added a wing
dedicated to her in 2005. In the U. S., a Chinese garden in Norfolk, Virginia,
which contains a memorial to Minnie Vautrin, added a memorial dedicated to
Chang, including her as the latest victim of the Nanking Massacre, and drawing
parallels between Chang and Vautrin, who also took her own life. Vautrin
exhausted herself trying to protect women and children during the Nanking
Massacre and subsequently during the Japanese occupation of Nanjing, finally
suffering a nervous breakdown in 1940. She returned to the US for medical
treatment, committing suicide a year later.
