Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 The Tiananmen Square protests of 1989, also
known as the June Fourth Incident in Chinese, were a series of popular
demonstrations in and near Tiananmen Square in Beijing beginning on 15 April
1989. The protests ended with military suppression on 4 June, an event
initially labeled and still widely known as the Tiananmen Square Massacre or
Tiananmen Massacre. However, secret US Embassy cables obtained by Wikileaks and
reported on by the "Daily Telegraph" "partly confirm the Chinese government's
account of the early hours of June 4, 1989, which has always insisted that
soldiers did not massacre demonstrators inside Tiananmen Square. Instead, the
cables show that Chinese soldiers opened fire on protesters outside the centre
of Beijing, as they fought their way towards the square from the west of the
city." In the late 1970s, the Chinese leadership of Deng Xiaoping abandoned
Maoist-style planned collectivist economics, and embraced market-oriented
reforms. Due to the rapid pace of change, by the late 1980s, grievances over
inflation, limited career prospects for students, and corruption of the party
elite were growing rapidly. Communist governments were also losing legitimacy
around the world, particularly in Eastern Europe. In April 1989, triggered by
the death of deposed Communist Party General Secretary Hu Yaobang, a liberal
reformer, mass gatherings and protests took place in and around Tiananmen
Square. At its height, some half a million protesters assembled there. The
demonstrations, consisting of local working residents as well as students,
called for government accountability, freedom of the press, freedom of speech,
and the restoration of workers' control over industry. Peaceful protests also
occurred in other cities, such as Shanghai and Wuhan, while looting and rioting
broke out in Xi'an and Changsha. The movement lasted for about seven weeks. The
government initially attempted to appease the protesters through concessions,
but a student-led hunger strike galvanized support for the demonstrators around
the country. Ultimately, Deng Xiaoping and other party elders resolved to use
force to suppress the movement. Party authorities declared martial law on 20
May. Military convoys entered Beijing on the evening of 3‚Äì4 June. Under
strict orders to clear the Square by dawn, the People's Liberation Army pushed
through makeshift blockades set up by demonstrators in western Beijing on their
way to Tiananmen Square. The PLA used live fire to clear their path of
protesters. The exact number of civilian deaths is not known, and the majority
of estimates range from several hundred to thousands. Internationally, the
Chinese government was widely condemned for the use of force against the
protesters. Western governments imposed economic sanctions and arms embargoes.
Following 4 June, the government conducted widespread arrests of protesters and
their supporters, cracked down on other protests around China, expelled foreign
journalists and strictly controlled coverage of the events in the domestic
press. Officials deemed sympathetic to the protests were demoted or purged.
General Secretary Zhao Ziyang, who was considered too sympathetic to the
movement, was ousted in a party leadership reshuffle. The aftermath of the
protests strengthened the power of orthodox Communist hardliners, and delayed
further market reforms until Deng Xiaoping's 1992 southern tour. To this day,
the government of the People's Republic of China continues to suppress public
mention or discussion about the protests. Name. In the Chinese language, the
incident is most commonly known as the June Fourth Incident. Colloquially,
often a simple June Fourth () is used. The nomenclature of the former is
consistent with the customary names of the other two great protests that
occurred in Tiananmen Square: the May Fourth Movement of 1919, and the April
Fifth Movement of 1976. "June Fourth" refers to the day on which the People's
Liberation Army cleared Tiananmen Square of protesters, although actual
operations began on the evening of 3 June. Some use the "June Fourth"
designation solely to refer to the killings carried out by the Army, while
others use it to refer to the entire movement. Names such as June Fourth
Movement () and 89 Democracy Movement () are used to describe the event in its
entirety. In Chinese dissident circles and among people of the movement, it is
commonly referred to as June Fourth Massacre () and June Fourth Crackdown ().
To bypass internet censorship in China, which uniformly considers all the
above-mentioned names too 'sensitive' for search engines and public forums,
alternative names have sprung up to describe the events on the internet, such
as May¬ 35th, VIIV (Roman numerals for 6 and 4) and "Eight Squared" (i.e. 82 =
64). The government of the People's Republic of China have used numerous names
for the event since 1989, gradually reducing the intensity of terminology
applied. As the events were unfolding, it was labelled a "Counterrevolutionary
Riot", which was later changed to simply "Riot", followed by "Political Storm",
and finally the leadership settled on the more neutralized phrase "Political
Storm between Spring and Summer of 1989," which it uses to this day. In
English, the terms Tiananmen Square Protests or Tiananmen Square Crackdown are
often used to describe the series of events. The term Tiananmen Square Massacre
was also commonly used by the media, but journalistic use has waned in recent
years. This is because much of the violence did not actually happen in
Tiananmen, but outside the square in the city of Beijing near the Muxidi area.
The term also gives a misleading impression that demonstrations only happened
in Beijing, when in fact they occurred in many cities throughout China.
Background. Challenges with reform. At the Third Plenum of the Eleventh
Communist Party Congress in 1978, the Chinese leadership initiated a series of
economic and political reforms, which led to the gradual implementation of a
market economy and some political liberalization that relaxed the system set up
by Mao Zedong. These reforms were generally successful in the early years and
well received by the public. However, the pace of political reform was slow, as
corruption and nepotism pervaded the shift toward a free-market economy. The
state-mandated pricing system, in place since the 1950s, had long kept prices
stable at low levels that reduced incentives to increase production. The
initial reforms created a two-tier system where some prices were fixed while
others were allowed to fluctuate. In a market with chronic shortages, this
allowed people with powerful connections to buy goods at low prices and sell at
market prices. In addition, the money supply had expanded too fast. At least a
third of factories were unprofitable. The government tightened the money supply
in 1988, leaving much of the economy without loans. Following the 1988 Beidaihe
meeting, the party leadership under Deng Xiaoping agreed to a transition to a
market-based price system. News of the relaxation of price controls triggered
waves of cash withdrawals, buying and hoarding all over China. The government
panicked and rescinded the price reforms in less than two weeks, but its impact
was pronounced for a much longer period of time. Inflation soared. Official
indices report a Consumer Price Index increase of 30% in Beijing between
1987‚Äì88, leading to panic among salaried workers that they could no longer
afford staple goods. Moreover, in the new market economy, unprofitable state-
owned enterprises were pressured to cut costs. The "iron rice bowl", i.e., job
security and a host of social benefits that come with it, ranging from medical
care to subsidized housing, were at risk for a vast segment of the population.
Social disenfranchisement and legitimacy crisis. Reformist leaders envisioned
in 1978 that intellectuals would play a leading role in guiding the country
through reforms, but this did not happen as planned. Despite the opening of new
universities and increased enrollment, the state-directed education system did
not adequately prepare for increasing market demand in the areas of
agriculture, light industry, services, and foreign investment. The job market
was especially limited for students specializing in social sciences and the
humanities. Moreover, private companies no longer needed to accept students
assigned to them by the state, and many high-paying jobs were offered on the
basis of nepotism and favoritism. Gaining a good state-assigned placement meant
navigating a highly inefficient bureaucracy that gave power to officials who
had little expertise in their area of jurisdiction. Facing a dismal job market
and limited chances of going abroad, intellectuals and students had a greater
vested interest in political issues. Small-scale study groups, such as the
"Democracy Salon" and the ""Caodi" Salon", began appearing on Beijing
university campuses. These organizations motivated the students to get involved
politically. At the same time, the party's nominally socialist ideology faced a
legitimacy crisis as it gradually adopted capitalist practices. Private
enterprise gave rise to profiteers who took advantage of lax regulations, and
who often flaunted their wealth in front of the 'have-nots' of society. Popular
discontent was brewing over the lack of fairness in wealth distribution. Greed,
not skill, appeared to be the most crucial success factor. There was widespread
public disillusionment over the country's future. People wanted change, yet the
power to define 'the correct path' continued to rest solely in the hands of the
state. Devising an appropriate response to the problems created by reforms
opened a rift in the Chinese leadership. The reformers ("the right", led by Hu
Yaobang) favoured political liberalization and a plurality of ideas as a
channel to voice popular discontent, and supported further reforms. The
conservatives ("the left", led by Chen Yun) said that the reforms had gone too
far, and advocated for a return to greater state control to ensure social
stability and to better align with the party's socialist ideology. Both sides
needed the backing of paramount leader Deng Xiaoping to carry out important
policy decisions. 1986 student demonstrations. In the summer of 1986,
astrophysics professor Fang Lizhi, who had returned from a tenure at Princeton
University, began a personal tour around universities in China, speaking about
liberty, human rights, and separation of powers. He became immensely popular
and his recorded speeches were widely circulated among students. In response,
Deng Xiaoping warned that Fang was worshipping Western lifestyles, capitalism,
and multi-party systems, while undermining China's socialist ideology,
traditional values, and the party's leadership. Inspired by Fang and other
'people-power' movements around the world, in December 1986, student
demonstrators staged protests against the slow pace of reform. The issues were
wide-ranging, and included demands for economic liberalization, democracy, and
rule of law. While the protests were initially contained in Hefei, where Fang
lived, it quickly spread to Beijing and other major cities. The central
leadership was alarmed by the protests, and accused the students of fomenting
Cultural Revolution-style turmoil. General Secretary Hu Yaobang was blamed for
taking a soft attitude and mishandling the protests, thus undermining social
stability. He was denounced thoroughly by conservatives. Hu was forced to
resign as General Secretary on 16 January 1987. Following his resignation, the
party began the "Anti Bourgeois Liberalization Campaign", taking aim at Hu,
political liberalization, and Western-inspired ideas in general. The Campaign
put a stop to student protests and tightened the political environment, but Hu
remained popular with progressives within the party, intellectuals, and
students. Protest development. Death of Hu Yaobang. When Hu Yaobang suddenly
died of a heart attack on 15 April 1989, students reacted strongly. Hu's death
provided the initial impetus for students to gather in large numbers. In
university campuses, many posters appeared eulogizing Hu, calling for a
reversal of Hu's legacy. Within days, most posters were writing about broader
political issues, such as freedom of the press, democracy, and corruption.
Small spontaneous gatherings to mourn Hu began on 15 April around Monument to
the People's Heroes at Tiananmen Square. On the same day, many students at
Peking University (PKU) and Tsinghua University erected shrines, and joined the
gathering in Tiananmen Square in a piecemeal fashion. Organized student
gatherings also began on a small scale in Xi'an and Shanghai on 16 April. On 17
April, students at the China University of Political Science and Law (CUPL)
made a large wreath to commemorate Hu Yaobang. Its laying-party was on 17 April
and a larger-than-expected crowd assembled. At five p.m., 500 CUPL students
reached the eastern gate of the Great Hall of the People, near Tiananmen
Square, to mourn Hu. The gathering featured speakers from various backgrounds
giving public orations commemorating Hu and discussing social problems.
However, it was soon deemed obstructive to the operation of the Great Hall, so
police intervened and attempted to disperse the students by persuasion. On the
morning of 18 April, students remained in the Square. Some gathered around the
Monument to the People's Heroes singing patriotic songs and listening to
impromptu speeches by student organizers, others gathered at the Great Hall.
Meanwhile, a few thousand students gathered at Xinhua Gate, the entrance to
Zhongnanhai, the seat of the party leadership, where they demanded dialogue
with the leadership. Police restrained the students from entering the compound.
Students then staged a sit-in. On 20 April, most students had been persuaded to
leave Xinhua Gate. To disperse about 200 students that remained, police
employed batons; minor clashes were reported. Many students felt they were
abused by the Police, and rumours about police brutality spread quickly. The
Xinhua Gate incident angered students on campus, where those who were not
hitherto politically active decided to join the protests. Also on this date, a
group of workers calling themselves the ‚ÄúBeijing Workers‚Äô Autonomous
Federation‚Äù issued two handbills challenging the central leadership. Hu's
state funeral took place on 22 April. On the evening of 21 April, some 100,000
students marched on Tiananmen Square, ignoring orders from Beijing municipal
authorities that the Square was to be closed off for the funeral. The funeral,
which took place inside the Great Hall and attended by the leadership, was
broadcast live to the students. General Secretary Zhao Ziyang delivered the
eulogy. The funeral seemed rushed, and only lasted 40 minutes, as emotions ran
high in the Square. Students wept. Security cordoned off the east entrance to
the Great Hall, but several students pressed forward. Three of these students
knelt on the steps of the Great Hall to present a petition and demanded to see
Premier Li Peng. However, no leaders emerged from the Great Hall, leaving the
students disappointed and angry; some called for a class boycott. From 21 to 23
April, students began organizing under the banners of formal organizations. On
23 April, the "Beijing Autonomous University Students Union" ("the Union") was
formed. It elected CUPL student Zhou Yongjun as chair; Wang Dan and Wu'erkaixi
also emerged as leaders. From this vantage point, the Union called for a
general class boycott at all Beijing universities. Such an independent
organization operating outside of party jurisdiction alarmed the leadership. On
22 April, near dusk, serious rioting broke out in Changsha and Xi'an. In Xi'an,
arson from rioters destroyed cars and houses, and looting occurred in shops
near the city's Xihua Gate. In Changsha, 38 stores were ransacked by looters.
Over 350 people were arrested in both cities. In Wuhan, university students
organized protests against the provincial government. As the situation became
more volatile nationally, Zhao Ziyang called numerous meetings of the Politburo
Standing Committee (PSC). Zhao stressed three points: discourage students from
further protests and ask them to go back to class, use all measures necessary
to combat rioting, and open forms of dialogue with students at different levels
of government. Premier Li Peng called upon Zhao to condemn protestors and
recognize the need to take more serious action. Zhao dismissed Li's views.
Despite calls for him to remain in Beijing, Zhao left for a scheduled state
visit to North Korea on 23 April. Turning point: 26 April Editorial. Zhao's
departure to North Korea left Li Peng as the acting executive authority in
Beijing. On 24 April, Li Peng and the PSC met with Beijing Party Secretary Li
Ximing and mayor Chen Xitong to gauge the situation at the Square. The
municipal officials wanted a quick resolution to the crisis, and framed the
protests as a conspiracy to overthrow China's political system and major party
leaders, including Deng Xiaoping. In Zhao's absence, the PSC agreed that firm
action against protesters must be taken. On the morning of 25 April, President
Yang Shangkun and Premier Li Peng met with Deng at the latter's residence. Deng
endorsed a hardline stance and said an appropriate 'warning' must be
disseminated via mass media to curb further demonstrations. The meeting firmly
established the first official evaluation of the protests from the leadership,
and highlighted Deng's having 'final say' on important issues. Li Peng
subsequently ordered Deng's views to be drafted as a communique and issued to
all high-level Communist Party officials in an effort to mobilize the party
apparatus against protesters. On 26 April, the party's official newspaper
"People's Daily" issued a front-page editorial titled "It is necessary to take
a clear-cut stand against disturbances." It accused "extremely small segments
of opportunists" of plotting to overthrow the Communist Party and the political
system. The statement enraged students, who interpreted it as a direct
indictment on the protests and its cause. The editorial backfired. Instead of
scaring students into submission, it antagonized the students against the
state. The editorial proved to be a major sticking point for the remainder of
the protests. It evoked memories of the 1976 Tiananmen Incident: an event that
was initially branded an anti-government conspiracy with much the same language
as the 26 April Editorial but was later rehabilitated as "patriotic" under
Deng's leadership. Organized by the Union, on 27 April some 50,000-100,000
students from all Beijing universities marched through the streets of the
capital to Tiananmen Square, breaking through lines set up by police, and
receiving widespread public support along the way, particularly from factory
workers. The student leaders, eager to show the patriotic nature of the
movement, also toned down anti-Communist slogans, choosing to present a message
of "anti-corruption, anti-cronyism" but "pro-party". In a twist of irony,
student factions who genuinely called for the overthrow of the Communist Party
gained traction as a result of the 26 April Editorial. The stunning success of
the March forced the government into making concessions and meeting with
student representatives. On 29 April, State Council spokesman Yuan Mu met with
appointed representatives of government-sanctioned student associations. While
the talks discussed a wide range of issues, including the editorial, the Xinhua
Gate incident, and freedom of the press, they achieved few substantive results.
Independent student leaders such as Wuer Kaixi refused to attend. The
government's tone grew increasingly conciliatory as Zhao Ziyang returned from
Pyongyang on 30 April and resumed his executive authority. In Zhao's view, the
hardliner approach had proven to be useless, and concession was the only
alternative. Zhao asked that the press be opened to report the movement
positively, and delivered two sympathetic speeches on 3‚Äì4 May. In the
speeches, Zhao said that the student's concerns about corruption were
legitimate, and that the student movement was patriotic in nature. The speeches
essentially negated the message presented by 26 April Editorial. While some
100,000 students marched on the streets of Beijing on 4 May to commemorate the
May Fourth Movement and repeat demands from earlier marches, many students were
satisfied with the government's concessions. On 4 May, all Beijing universities
except PKU and BNU announced the end of the class boycott. Subsequently, the
majority of students began to lose interest in the movement. Protests escalate.
Preparing for dialogue. The leadership was divided on how to respond to the
movement as early as mid-April. After Zhao Ziyang's return from North Korea,
the divisions intensified. Those who supported continued dialogue and a soft
approach with students rallied behind Zhao Ziyang, while hardliner
conservatives who opposed the movement rallied behind Premier Li Peng. Zhao and
Li clashed at a PSC meeting on 1 May. Li maintained that the need for stability
overrides all else, while Zhao said that the party should show support for
increased democracy and transparency. Zhao pushed the case for further
dialogue. In preparation for dialogue, the Autonomous Student Union elected
representatives to a formal Dialogue Delegation. However, the Union leaders
were reluctant to let the Delegation unilaterally take control of the movement.
Facing internal discord and declining engagement from the student body at
large, a group of charismatic leaders, including Wang Dan and Wu'erkaixi,
called for more radical measures to regain momentum. They believed that the
government's 'dialogue' was merely a way to trick the students into submission.
They began mobilizing students for a hunger strike on 11 May. Hunger strikes
begin. Students began the hunger strike on 13 May, two days prior to the highly
publicized state visit by Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev. Knowing that the
welcoming ceremony for Gorbachev was scheduled to be held on the Square,
student leaders wanted to use the hunger strike there as a bargaining chip to
force the government into meeting their demands. Moreover, the hunger strike
gained widespread sympathy from the population at large and earned the student
movement the moral high ground that it sought. By the afternoon of 13 May, some
300,000 were gathered at the Square. Inspired by the course of events in
Beijing, protests and strikes began at universities in other cities, with many
students traveling to Beijing to join the demonstration. Generally, the
demonstration at Tiananmen Square was well-ordered, with daily marches of
students from various Beijing-area colleges displaying their solidarity with
the class boycott and with the demands of the protest. The students sang "The
Internationale", the world socialist anthem, on their way to, and within, the
square. Afraid that the movement would now spin out of control, Deng Xiaoping
asked that the Square be cleared for the Gorbachev visit. Executing Deng's
request, Zhao used a soft approach, and directed his subordinates to coordinate
negotiations with students immediately. Zhao believed he could appeal to the
students' patriotism, and that the students understood signs of internal
turmoil during the Sino-Soviet summit would embarrass the nation (not just the
government). On the morning of 13 May, Yan Mingfu, head of the Party's United
Front, called an emergency meeting, gathering prominent student leaders and
intellectuals, including Liu Xiaobo, Chen Ziming and Wang Juntao. Yan said the
government was prepared to hold immediate dialogue with student
representatives, but that the Tiananmen welcoming ceremony for Gorbachev would
be cancelled whether the students withdraw or not - in effect removing the
bargaining power the students thought they possessed. The announcement sent the
student leadership into disarray. Gorbachev visit. Press restrictions were
loosened significantly during early to mid May. State media began broadcasting
footage sympathetic to protesters and the movement, including the hunger
strikers. On 14 May, intellectuals led by Dai Qing gained permission from Hu
Qili to bypass government censorship and air the progressive views of the
nation's intellectuals on "Guangming Daily". The intellectuals then issued an
urgent appeal for the students to leave the Square. Many students, however,
believed that the intellectuals were speaking for the government, and refused
to budge. That evening, formal negotiations took place between government
representatives led by Yan Mingfu and student representatives led by Shen Tong
and Xiang Xiaoji. Yan affirmed the patriotic nature of the student movement and
pleaded for the students to withdraw from the Square. While Yan's apparent
sincerity for compromise satisfied some students, the meeting grew increasingly
chaotic as competing student factions relayed uncoordinated and incoherent
demands to the leadership. Shortly after student leaders learned that the event
had not been broadcast nationally as promised, the meeting fell apart. Yan then
personally went to the Square to appeal to the students, even offering himself
to be held hostage. He also took the student's plea to Li Peng the next day,
asking Li to consider formally retracting the 26 April Editorial and branding
the movement as "patriotic and democratic." Li dismissed the idea. The students
remained in the Square during the Gorbachev visit; his welcoming ceremony was
held at the airport. The Sino-Soviet summit, the first of its kind in some
thirty years, marked the normalization of Sino-Soviet relations, and was seen
as a breakthrough of tremendous historical significance for China's leaders.
That the smooth proceedings of this event had been derailed by the student
movement embarrassed the leadership and drove many moderates onto a more
'hardliner' path. The summit between Deng and Gorbachev took place at the Great
Hall amidst the backdrop of commotion and protest in the Square. When Gorbachev
met with Zhao on 16 May, Zhao told the Soviet leader, and by extension the
international press, that Deng was still the 'paramount authority' in China.
Deng felt that this remark was Zhao's attempt to shift blame for mishandling
the movement to him. The statement marked a decisive split between the
country's two most senior leaders. Gathering momentum. The hunger strike
galvanized support for the students and aroused sympathy across the country.
Around a million Beijing residents from all walks of life demonstrated in
solidarity on 17‚Äì18 May. These included PLA personnel, police officers, and
lower party officials. Many grassroots Party and Youth League organizations, as
well as government-sponsored labour unions, encouraged their membership to
demonstrate. In addition, several of China's non-Communist parties sent a
letter to Li Peng in support of students. The Chinese Red Cross issued a
special notice and sent in a large number of personnel to provide medical
services to the hunger strikers on the Square. After the departure of Mikhail
Gorbachev, many foreign journalists remained in the Chinese capital to cover
the protests, giving the movement international spotlight. Western governments
urged Beijing to exercise restraint. The movement, on the wane by the end of
April, now regained momentum that seemed unstoppable. By 17 May, as students
from across the country poured into the capital to join the movement, protests
of varying size were occurring in some 400 Chinese cities. Students
demonstrated at local party branches in Fujian, Hubei, and Xinjiang. Without a
clear position from the Beijing leadership, local authorities did not know how
to respond. Since the demonstrations now incorporated a wide range of social
groups with varying grievances, it became increasingly unclear with whom the
government could negotiate, and what exactly the demands were. For its part,
the government remained indecisive on how to deal with the situation, as its
authority and legitimacy gradually eroded, with the hunger strikers now
occupying moral high ground. These combined circumstances put immense pressure
on the authorities to act, and martial law was discussed as a viable response.
Since the situation seemed intractable, the weight of taking decisive action
fell on paramount leader Deng Xiaoping. On 17 May, a PSC meeting was called at
Deng's residence. At the meeting, Zhao Ziyang's concessions-based strategy was
criticized. Li Peng and Deng asserted that by making a conciliatory speech on 4
May, Zhao exposed divisions within the top leadership and emboldened the
students. Deng warned that if Beijing is not pacified quickly, the country
risked civil war and another Cultural Revolution; his views were echoed by the
party elders. Deng then moved to declare martial law as a show of the
government's no-tolerance stance. To justify martial law, the demonstrators
were described as tools of "bourgeois liberalism" advocates who were pulling
the strings behind the scenes, as well as tools of elements within the party
who wished to further their personal ambitions. On the evening of 17 May, the
PSC met at Zhongnanhai to finalize plans for martial law. Zhao announced to the
body that he was ready to "take a leave", citing he could not bring himself to
carry out martial law. Hu Qili also voiced his reluctance. While Li Peng and
Yao Yilin both supported declaring martial law, Qiao Shi was ambivalent. Qiao
said that while he opposed further concessions, he did not see martial law as a
practical way to resolve the matter. The elders in attendance at the meeting,
Bo Yibo and Yang Shangkun, urged the PSC to follow Deng's orders. Zhao did not
consider the inconclusive PSC vote to have legally binding implications on
martial law; Yang, in his capacity as Vice-Chairman of the Central Military
Commission, went on to mobilize the military to move into the capital. Li Peng
met with students for the first time on 18 May in an attempt to placate public
concern over the hunger strike. During the talks, student leaders once again
demanded that the government rescind the 26 April Editorial and affirm the
student movement as "patriotic". Li Peng said the government's main concern was
sending hunger strikers to hospital. The discussions yielded little substantive
results, but gained student leaders prominent airtime on national television.
In the early morning of 19 May, Zhao Ziyang went to Tiananmen in what became
his political swan song. He was accompanied by Wen Jiabao. Li Peng also went to
the Square, but left shortly thereafter. At 4:50¬ am Zhao made a speech with a
bullhorn to a crowd of students, urging the students to end the hunger strike.
He told the students that they were still young and urged them to stay healthy
and not to sacrifice themselves without due concern for their futures. Zhao's
emotional speech was applauded by some students. It would be his last public
appearance. Outside of Beijing. University students in Shanghai also took to
the streets to commemorate the death of Hu Yaobang and protest against certain
policies of the government. In many cases, these were supported by the
universities' Party committees. Jiang Zemin, then-Municipal Party Secretary,
addressed the student protesters in a bandage and 'expressed his
understanding', as he was a former student agitator before 1949. At the same
time, he moved swiftly to send in police forces to control the streets and to
purge Communist Party leaders who had supported the students. On 19 April, the
editors of the "World Economic Herald", a magazine close to reformists, decided
to publish a commemorative section on Hu. Inside was an article by Yan Jiaqi,
which commented favourably on the Beijing student protests, and called for a
reassessment of Hu's 1987 purge. Sensing the conservative political trends in
Beijing, Jiang Zemin demanded that the article be censored. Many newspapers
were printed with a blank page. Jiang then suspended Qin Benli. His decisive
action earned accolades from party elders, who praised Jiang's loyalty. In Hong
Kong, on 27 May, over 300,000 people gathered at Happy Valley Racecourse for a
gathering called "Democratic songs dedicated for China." Many Hong Kong
celebrities sang songs and expressed their support for the students in Beijing.
The following day, a procession of 1.5¬ million people, one fourth of Hong
Kong's population, led by Martin Lee, Szeto Wah and other organization leaders,
paraded through Hong Kong Island. Across the world, especially where ethnic-
Chinese lived, people gathered and protested. Many governments, including those
of the United States and Japan, issued travel warnings to China. Military
action. Martial law. On 19 May, the PSC met with military leaders and party
elders. Deng presided over the meeting and said that martial law was the only
option. At the meeting Deng declared that he was 'mistaken' in choosing Hu
Yaobang and Zhao Ziyang as his successors, and resolved to remove Zhao from his
position. Deng also vowed to deal resolutely with Zhao's supporters and begin
propaganda work. The Chinese government declared martial law on 20 May, and
deployed People's Liberation Army (PLA) forces in three to four major vehicle
convoys to Beijing. Their entry into the city was blocked at its suburbs by
throngs of protesters. Tens of thousands of demonstrators surrounded military
vehicles, preventing them from either advancing or retreating. Protesters
lectured soldiers and appealed to them to join their cause; they also provided
soldiers with food, water, and shelter. Seeing no way forward, the authorities
ordered the army to withdraw on 24 May. All government forces retreated to
bases outside the city. While the Army's retreat was initially seen as 'turning
the tide' in favour of protesters, in reality mobilization took place across
the country for a final assault; every Military Region (MR) deployed soldiers
in the outskirts of Beijing except for the Capital MR itself. Some units
arrived by air, while others arrived at Shahe railway station in suburban
Beijing. Guangzhou's civil aviation authorities put regular airline tickets on
hold to prepare for transporting military units.. At the same time, internal
divisions intensified within the student movement itself. By late May, the
students became increasingly disorganized with no clear leadership or unified
course of action. Moreover, Tiananmen Square was overcrowded and facing serious
hygiene problems. Hou Dejian suggested an open election of the student
leadership to speak for the movement, but was met with opposition. Meanwhile,
Wang Dan moderated his position, ostensibly sensing the impending military
action and consequences, and advocated for a temporary withdraw from Tiananmen
Square to re-group on campus, but this was opposed by 'hardliner' student
factions who wanted to hold the Square. The increasing internal friction would
lead to struggles for control of the loudspeakers in the middle of the square
in a series of 'mini-coups': whoever controlled the loudspeakers was 'in
charge' of the movement. Some students would wait at the train station to greet
arrivals of students from other parts of the country in an attempt to enlist
factional support. 1 and 2 June. For the party leadership, the days leading up
to 4 June were crucial in their decision making. The leadership agreed that it
was necessary to end the ‚Äúturmoil,‚Äù and that the students occupying the
Square should return to their campuses. However, they struggled with the idea
of using force. In order to carry out the clearing of the Square, the members
of the Politburo needed to agree that using martial law to restore order was
the only option. On 1 June Li Peng issued a report titled ‚ÄúOn the True Nature
of the Turmoil‚Äù, which was circulated to every member of the Politburo. The
report aimed to persuade the Politburo of the necessity and legality of
clearing Tiananmen Square by referring to the protestors as terrorists and
counterrevolutionaries. The report stated that turmoil was continuing to grow,
the students had no plans to leave, and they were gaining popular support.
Further justification for martial law came in the form of a report submitted by
the Ministry of State Security (MSS) to the party leadership, which emphasized
the infiltration of bourgeois liberalism into China and the negative effect
that the West ‚Äì particularly the United States ‚Äì had on the students. The
MSS expressed its belief that American forces had intervened in the student
movement in hopes of overthrowing the Communist Party. The report created a
sense of urgency within the party, and provided justification for military
action. In conjunction with the plan to clear the Square by force, the
Politburo received word from the martial law troops headquarters stating that
the troops were ready to help stabilize the capital, and that they understood
the necessity and legality of martial law to overcome the turmoil. On 2 June,
the movement saw an increase in action and protest, solidifying the CPC‚Äôs
decision that it was time to act. Protests broke out as newspapers published
articles that called for the students to leave Tiananmen Square and end the
movement. Many of the students in the Square were not willing to leave and were
outraged by the articles. They were also outraged by "Beijing Daily‚Äôs" 1 June
article ‚ÄúTiananmen, I Cry for You‚Äù, written by a fellow student who had
become disillusioned with the movement, as he thought it was chaotic and
disorganized. In response to the articles, thousands of students lined the
streets of Beijing to protest against leaving the Square. On 2 June, three
intellectuals, Liu Xiaobo, Zhou Duo, Gao Xin, and a Taiwanese singer Hou Dejian
declared a second hunger strike because they wanted to revive the pro-democracy
movement. After weeks of occupying the Square, the students were tired, and
internal rifts opened between moderate and hardliner student groups. In their
declaration speech, the hunger strikers openly criticized the government‚Äôs
suppression of the movement to remind the students that their cause was worth
fighting for, and pushed them to continue their occupation of the Square.
During a meeting on 2 June, the party formally moved to clear the Square by
force. Records from this meeting indicate that the Party Elders (Deng, Li
Xiannian, Yang Shangkun, Peng Zhen and Wang Zhen) agreed with the PSC that the
Square needed to be cleared as quickly as possible. They also agreed that the
Square needed to be cleared as peacefully as possible, but if protesters did
not cooperate, the troops were authorized to use force to complete the job. In
preparation for clearing the Square, martial law troops moved into Beijing. On
the morning of 2 June, newspapers reported that troops were positioned in ten
key areas in the city. Around midnight of 2 June an order went out to the
remaining martial law troops to move to designated areas. After finalizing the
decision to clear the Square, the CPC intended to act quickly. On the evening
of 2 June, there were reports that a police Jeep ran into four civilians,
killing three, and injuring the other. This incident sparked fear that the army
and the police were trying to advance into Tiananmen Square. Student leaders
issued emergency orders for the students to set up roadblocks at major
intersections to prevent the advance of the large numbers of armed troops that
were attempting to infiltrate the Square. In the early hours of 3 June, the
first reports of violence on both sides were reported. 3 and 4 June: Military
advances to Tiananmen Square. Soldiers and tanks from the 27th and 38th Armies
of the People's Liberation Army were sent to take control of Beijing and clear
Tiananmen Square. The 27th Army was commanded by a relative of Yang Shangkun.
Intelligence reports also indicated that 27th and 38th units were brought in
from outside provinces because the PLA troops were considered to be sympathetic
to demonstrators. Reports described the 27th as having been responsible for
most civilian deaths and suggested that elements of the 27th established
defensive positions in Beijing, potentially to defend against attacks by other
military units. There were rumours at the time that high-ranking officials
sympathised with the pro-democracy protesters and reports of defiance among
other troops. Major General Xu Qinxian, commander of the 38th Army, shocked the
top leadership when he refused a verbal order from General Li Laizhu to send
the 38th in to clear the square; Xu had insisted on a written order. Xu was
immediately removed from command and was later jailed for five years and
expelled from the Party. As word spread that hundreds of thousands of troops
were advancing from all four directions, residents flooded the streets to block
them. As they had done two weeks earlier, people set up barricades at major
intersections. At about 10:30¬ pm, near the Muxidi apartment buildings (home to
high-level Party officials and their families), the army began firing live
bullets at protestors, killing many. Some sources say that protesters first
threw rocks and Molotov cocktails at police and army vehicles and lit many
vehicles on fire in the streets all around Tiananmen, some with their occupants
still inside them. There were reports of soldiers being burned alive in their
armoured personnel carriers while others were beaten to death. Therefore,
soldiers responded by opening fire on protesters. Soldiers raked apartment
buildings in the area with gunfire, and some people inside or on their
balconies were shot. The reporting of Timothy Brook and others say that the
army was ordered to get to the Square by midnight. Getting desperate, because
they were unable to move forward, it was decided by unknown officials to use
whatever means were necessary, and the army therefore opened fire on the
civilians blocking their way. John Pomfret, reporter from the Washington Post,
concluded later that "Deng and the Party elders made the decision that, because
they believed this was a nationwide counterrevolutionary movement similar to
what was happening in the Soviet Union, they needed to make a bloody stand to
cower their population back into submission." The first rounds caught the
civilians by surprise and at first they did not believe the army was using live
ammunition. Live ammunition, however, did not drive the people from the
streets. As the army advanced towards the square, a battle raged in the
surrounding streets. The army attempted to clear the streets using tear gas and
gunfire. Protesters had blocked the slowly advancing army by constructing
barricades of vehicles, and "in other cases army is breaking though human
barriers and they protestors have to be shot." Many injured citizens were saved
by rickshaw drivers who ventured into the no-man's-land between the soldiers
and crowds and carried the wounded off to hospitals. During the military
action, many people wore black armbands in protest against the government,
crowding boulevards or congregating by smoking barricades. In several cases,
soldiers were pulled from tanks, beaten and killed by protesters. Meanwhile,
the PLA systematically established checkpoints around the city, chasing after
protesters and blocking off the university district. Within the Square itself,
there was a debate between those who wished to withdraw peacefully, including
Han Dongfang, and those who wished to stand within the square, such as Chai
Ling. At about 1:00¬ am, the army finally reached Tiananmen Square and waited
for orders from the government. The soldiers had been told not to open fire,
but they had also been told that they must clear the square by 6:00 a.m.‚Äì-no
exceptions. They made a final offer of amnesty if the few thousand remaining
students would leave. About 4:00¬ am, student leaders put the matter to a vote:
Leave the square, or stay and face the consequences. The remaining students,
numbering a few hundred, left the square under the military's watch before
dawn. Armored personnel carriers (APCs) rolled up the roads, firing ahead and
off to the sides. BBC reporter Kate Adie spoke of "indiscriminate fire" within
the square. Eyewitness reporter Charlie Cole also saw Chinese soldiers firing
Type 56 rifles into the crowd near an APC which had just been torched. Students
who sought refuge in buses were pulled out by groups of soldiers and beaten
with heavy sticks. Some students attempting to leave the square were beaten.
Leaders of the protest inside the square, where some had attempted to erect
flimsy barricades ahead of the APCs, were said to have "implored" the students
not to use weapons (such as Molotov cocktails) against the oncoming soldiers.
Meanwhile, many students apparently were shouting, "Why are you killing us?"
Around 4:30 am on 4 June, tanks smashed into the square, crushing vehicles and
people with their treads, according to Cole. By 5:40¬ am 4 June, the Square had
been cleared. Later accounts by foreign journalists reported few casualties
during the Square-clearing process itself, citing that much of the killings
happened in the Muxidi area on the way to the Square but not inside it. On the
morning of 5 June, protesters, parents of the injured and dead, workers and
infuriated residents tried to enter the blockaded square but were shot at by
the soldiers. The soldiers shot them in the back when they were running away.
These actions were repeated several times. After order was restored in Beijing
on 4 June, protests continued in other cities of mainland China for several
days. There were large protests in Hong Kong, where people again wore black in
solidarity with the demonstrators in Beijing. There were protests in Guangzhou,
and large-scale protests in Shanghai with a general strike. There were also
protests in other countries, many adopting the use of black armbands as well.
According to Amnesty International at least 300 people were killed in Chengdu
on 5 June. Troops in Chengdu used concussion grenades, truncheons, knives and
electric cattle prods against civilians. Hospitals were ordered to not accept
students and on the second night the ambulance service was stopped by police.
By and large, the government regained control in the week following the
military's seizure of the Square. A political purge followed in which officials
responsible for organizing or condoning the protests were removed, and protest
leaders jailed. Number of deaths. The number of dead and wounded remains
unclear because of the large discrepancies between the different estimates,
which range from several hundred to several thousand. Some of the early
estimates were based on reports of a casualty figure of 2,600 from the Chinese
Red Cross. PBS Foundation claim the official Chinese government figure is 241
dead, including soldiers, and 7,000 wounded. Nicholas D. Kristof of "The New
York Times" wrote that due to the lack of physical evidence it is impossible to
determine the actual number of casualties, but that "it seems plausible that
about fifty soldiers and policemen were killed, along with 400 to 800
civilians." The Chinese government has maintained that there were no deaths
within the Square itself. Jay Mathews, former Beijing bureau chief for the
Washington Post said "as far as can be determined from the available evidence,
no one died that night in Tiananmen Square". Videos taken there at the time
recorded the sound of gunshots but there is no video showing anyone being shot.
The State Council claimed 5,000 PLA and 2,000 civilians wounded. Yuan Mu, the
spokesman of the State Council, said that about 300 soldiers and civilians
died, including 23 students from universities in Beijing, along with a number
of people he described as "ruffians". According to Chen Xitong, then Beijing
mayor, 200 civilians and several dozen soldiers died. Other sources stated that
3,000 civilians and 6,000 soldiers were injured. According to "The Washington
Post" first Beijing bureau chief, Jay Mathews: "A few people may have been
killed by random shooting on streets near the square, but all verified
eyewitness accounts say that the students who remained in the square when
troops arrived were allowed to leave peacefully. Hundreds of people, most of
them workers and passersby, did die that night, but in a different place and
under different circumstances." US ambassador James Lilley's account of the
massacre notes that US State Department diplomats witnessed Chinese troops
opening fire on unarmed people and based on visits to hospitals around Beijing
a minimum of hundreds had been killed. General consensus has emerged that much
of the shooting took place outside of the Square; thus a count of deaths within
the Square is not reflective of the scale of violence that took place. In
addition, the Army reportedly fired on students after they left the Square,
especially in the area near the Beijing concert hall. Reactions. Shanghai. On 5
June, students marched very quickly on the streets and stopped traffic using
roadblocks. Factory workers skipped work and railway traffic was also blocked.
Public transport was also suspended early in the morning. According to the
British Broadcasting Corporation ‚Äúten thousand staff members and workers
could not get to work on time‚Äù. The next day, The Shanghai Municipal
Government sent out 6,500 people to remove the roadblocks. According to
reports, ‚ÄúAt 8:45¬ pm the number 161 train from Beijing ran over nine people
who had gathered at the spectacle of a blocked locomotive. Five of them died.
By 10¬ pm more than thirty thousand people had gathered at the scene,
interrupting rail traffic and creating a disturbance. Protesters beat up the
train engineer, set fire to railcars, and prevented fire trucks from entering
the site‚Äù. On 7 June,‚ÄúAt Tongji University, East China Normal University,
and Shanghai Polytechnic University, students stormed school auditoriums and
classroom buildings, where they erected biers‚Äù (meaning a coffin along with
its stand). More and more students erected roadblocks and interrupted traffic,
and approximately 3,000 students left campus. On the evening of 7 June,
Shanghai Mayor Zhu Rongji gave a televised speech, in which he stated ‚ÄúAs
mayor, I solemnly declare that neither the Party Committee nor the Municipal
Government has considered calling in the army. We have never envisaged military
control or martial law; we seek only to stabilize Shanghai, to steady the
situation, to insist on production, and to ensure normal life‚Äù. Xi‚Äôan. On 5
and 6 June, students marched, set up roadblocks, and stopped workers from
entering factories. By 8 June, provincial authorities said that the city had
stabilized and called for ‚Äúrestraint of rioters and avoidance of face-to-face
confrontation or any escalation of conflict‚Äù. Wuhan. On 5 June, approximately
20,000 students from the University of DongJin marched to Tiananmen Square.
Some also blocked the ‚ÄúYangtze River Railway bridge for eight hours, and
another four thousand massed in the square in front of the railway station‚Äù.
The next day, students continued demonstrating in the streets and stopped
traffic. About one thousand students ‚Äústaged a sit-in on the railroad
tracks‚Äù. Rail traffic on the Beijing-Guangzhou and Wuhan-Dalian lines was
interrupted. The students also urged workers from major enterprises to go on
strike. On the early morning of 7 June students used buses to block traffic;
‚ÄúThey held a memorial at Dadongmen and roadblocks were erected at
intersections‚Äù. A small group of students stopped a freight train and
‚Äúpoured gasoline over the freight cars but were stopped in the nick of time
by arriving police‚Äù. The situation in the city was tense and residents
‚Äúwithdrew cash and began panic buying‚Äù. Nanjing. On 5, 6 and 7 June,
students marched, made speeches, blocked traffic and tried to stop workers from
working. On 7 June, ‚ÄúAround 7¬ am more than four hundred students from four
colleges including Hehai University, blocked the Yangtze River bridge with four
buses, allowing only mail trucks and ice deliveries to pass‚Äù. In the early
evening traffic was still blocked. Students from schools including Nanjing
University set up ‚Äúroadblocks at the Zhongyangmen Railway Bridge; not a
single train could pass through from 8:40¬ am until 4¬ pm, when the students
were finally persuaded to evacuate‚Äù. Traffic resumed by the end of the day.
On 8 June, students from Nanjing University and Hehai University ‚Äúretook an
overpass one kilometer from the Nanjing Railway Station, halting traffic‚Äù.
Students also staged ‚Äúa sit-in at the south end of the highway section of the
Nanjing Yangtze River Bridge and at the Zhongyangmen section of the Beijing
Shanghai rail line‚Äù. The Jiangsu Provincial Party informed the students that
the situation was way out of control, and stated that Public Security would
punish the people responsible. Deng addresses the Army. On 9 June, Deng
Xiaoping appeared in public for the first time since the protests began. He
started his speech to a group of generals in Beijing by recognizing the
‚Äúmartyrs‚Äù (PLA soldiers who had died). Deng stated that the goal of the
movement was to overthrow the Party and the state. ‚ÄúTheir goal is to
establish a totally Western-dependent bourgeois republic,‚Äù Deng said of the
protesters. Deng argued that protesters had complained about corruption to
cover their real motive, which was to replace the socialist system. He said
that "the entire imperialist Western world plans to make all socialist
countries discard the socialist road and then bring them under the monopoly of
international capital and onto the capitalist road". International reaction.
The events at Tiananmen were the first of their type shown in detail on Western
television. The Chinese government's response was denounced, particularly by
Western governments and media. Criticism came from both Western and Eastern
Europe, North America, Australia and some east Asian and Latin American
countries. Notably, many Asian countries remained silent throughout the
protests; the government of India responded to the massacre by ordering the
state television to pare down the coverage to the barest minimum, so as not to
jeopardize a thawing in relations with China, and to offer political empathy
for the events. North Korea, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, and East Germany, among
others, supported the Chinese government and denounced the protests. Overseas
Chinese students demonstrated in many cities in Europe, America, the Middle
East and Asia. Aftermath. Arrests of student leaders. Wu Guoguang, former aide
to Zhao Ziyang was quoted as saying that the account of 38th Army commander
Maj. Gen. Xu's revealed for the first time that the Central Military Commission
issued verbal orders fearing written records of the crackdown would go down in
history; he said this suggested they knew the action was unlawful. Chinese
authorities summarily tried and executed many of the workers they arrested in
Beijing. In contrast, the students ‚Äì many of whom came from relatively
affluent backgrounds and were well-connected ‚Äì received much lighter
sentences. Wang Dan, the student leader who topped the most wanted list, spent
seven years in prison. Many of the students and university staff implicated
were permanently politically stigmatized, some never to be employed again. Some
dissidents were able to escape to the United States, the United Kingdom,
France, and other Western nations under Operation Yellowbird that was organized
from Hong Kong, a British territory at the time. Smaller protest actions
continued in other cities for a few days. Some university staff and students
who had witnessed the killings in Beijing organised or spurred commemorative
events upon their return to school. At Shanghai's prestigious Jiaotong
University, for example, the party secretary organised a public commemoration
event, with engineering students producing a large metal wreath. However, these
commemorations were quickly put down, with those responsible being put to death
by firing squad. During and after the demonstration, the authorities attempted
to arrest and prosecute the student leaders of the Chinese democracy movement,
notably Wang Dan, Chai Ling, Zhao Changqing and Wuer Kaixi. Wang Dan was
arrested, convicted and sent to prison, then allowed to emigrate to the United
States on the grounds of medical parole. As a lesser figure in the
demonstrations, Zhao was released after six months in prison. However, he was
once again incarcerated for continuing to petition for political reform in
China. Wuer Kaixi escaped to Taiwan. He is married and holds a job as a
political commentator on Taiwanese national radio. Chai Ling escaped to France,
and then to the United States. In a public speech given at the University of
Michigan in November 2007, Wang Dan commented on the current status of former
student leaders: Chai Ling started a hi-tech company in the US, while Li Lu
became an investment banker in Wall Street and started a company. Wang Dan said
his plan was to find an academic job in the US after receiving his PhD from
Harvard University. Chai Ling has since started the non-profit organization
'All Girls Allowed,' devoted to helping women in China and to fighting China's
One Child Policy. Chen Ziming and Wang Juntao were arrested in late 1989 for
their involvement in the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests. Chinese authorities
alleged they were the ‚Äúblack hands‚Äù behind the movement. Both Chen and Wang
rejected the allegations made against them. They were put on trial in 1990 and
sentenced to 13 years in prison. High-level political changes. To purge
sympathizers of Tiananmen demonstrators, the Communist Party initiated a one
and half year long program similar to Anti-Rightist Movement. It aimed to "deal
strictly with those inside the party with serious tendencies toward bourgeois
liberalization". Four million people were reportedly investigated for their
role in the protests. More than 30,000 communist officers were deployed to
assess political reliability of more than one million government officials. The
authorities arrested tens if not hundreds of thousands of people across the
country. Some were seized in broad daylight while they walked in the street;
others were arrested at night. Many were jailed or sent to labor camps. They
were often denied access to see their families and often put in cells so
crowded that not everyone had space to sleep. Dissidents shared cells with
murderers and rapists, and torture was not uncommon. The Party leadership
expelled Zhao Ziyang from the Politburo Standing Committee of the Communist
Party of China (PSC), because he opposed martial law, and Zhao remained under
house arrest until his death. Hu Qili, a PSC member who opposed the martial law
but abstained from voting, was also removed from the committee. He was,
however, able to retain his party membership, and after "changing his opinion",
was reassigned as deputy minister of Machine-Building and the Electronics
Industry. Another reform-minded Chinese leader, Wan Li, was also put under
house arrest immediately after he stepped out of his plane at Beijing Capital
International Airport upon returning from his shortened trip abroad; the
authorities declared his detention to be on health grounds. When Wan Li was
released from his house arrest after he finally "changed his opinion" he, like
Qiao Shi, was transferred to a different position with equal rank but a mostly
ceremonial role. Several Chinese ambassadors abroad claimed political asylum.
The event elevated Jiang Zemin ‚Äì then Party Secretary of Shanghai ‚Äì to
become the General Secretary of the Communist Party of China. Jiang's decisive
actions in Shanghai, in closing down reform-leaning publications and preventing
deadly violence, won him support from party elders in Beijing. Members of the
government prepared a white paper explaining the government's viewpoint on the
protests. An anonymous source within the PRC government smuggled the document
out of China, and Public Affairs published it in January 2001 as the "Tiananmen
Papers". Media and discourse. The suppression on 4 June marked the end of a
period of relative press freedom in China, and media workers‚Äîboth foreign and
domestic‚Äîfaced heightened restrictions and punishment in the aftermath of the
crackdown. State media mostly gave reports sympathetic to the students in the
immediate aftermath. As a result, those responsible were all later removed. Two
news anchors who reported this event on 4 June in the daily "Xinwen Lianbo"
broadcast on China Central Television were fired because they displayed sad
emotions. Wu Xiaoyong, the son of former foreign minister Wu Xueqian was
removed from the English Program Department of Chinese Radio International,
ostensibly for his sympathies towards protesters. Editors and other staff at
"People's Daily", including director Qian Liren and Editor-in-Chief Tan Wenrui,
were also sacked because of reports in the paper which were sympathetic towards
the protesters. Several editors were arrested, with Wu Xuecan, who organised
the publication of an unauthorised Extra edition, sentenced to four years'
imprisonment. Several foreign journalists who had covered the crackdown were
expelled in the weeks that followed, while others were harassed by authorities
or blacklisted from reentering the country. In Shanghai, foreign consulates
were told that the safety of journalists who failed to heed newly enacted
reporting guidelines could not be guaranteed. For instance, some of the authors
of the film "River Elegy" were arrested, and some of the authors fled mainland
China. Gifford concluded that "China the concept, China the empire, China the
construct of two thousand years of imperial thinking" has forbidden and may
always forbid "independent thinking" as that would lead to the questioning of
China's political system. Gifford added that people born after 1970 had "near-
complete depoliticization" while older intellectuals no longer focus on
political change and instead focus on economic reform. Impact. Domestic
political trends. The protests led to a strengthened role for the state. In its
aftermath, many of the freedoms introduced during the 1980s were rescinded, as
the party returned to a conventional Leninist mold and re-established firm
control over the press, publishing, and mass media. The protests were also a
blow to the 'separation of powers' model, whereby the positions of President,
Premier, and the General Secretary were intended to be different people
following 1982 to prevent the excesses of Mao-style personal rule. However,
when President Yang Shangkun openly split with General Secretary Zhao Ziyang
over the use of force, official policy became inconsistent and incoherent,
significantly impeding the exercise of power. Following the protests, to avoid
another open split within the leadership, the roles of General Secretary,
President, and Central Military Commission Chairman were all consolidated into
the same person, Jiang Zemin (and by extension his successor, Hu Jintao). In
1989, neither the Chinese military nor the Beijing police had sufficient anti-
riot gear, such as rubber bullets and tear gas. After the Tiananmen Square
protests, riot police in Chinese cities were equipped with non-lethal equipment
for riot control. The protests led to increased spending on internal security
and expanded the role of the People's Armed Police in suppressing urban
protests. Effect on economic reform. The aftermath of the protests saw the
resurgence of conservative attitudes towards reform among policymakers,
intended to slow the rapid changes that were said to have contributed to the
causes of the protest. Deng Xiaoping, the "architect" of the reform policy, saw
his influence significantly reduced following the protests, forcing him into
making concessions with socialist hardliners. In dismissing Zhao Ziyang, who
shared Deng's vision for economic reform but disagreed with him over politics,
Deng had lost the foremost champion of his own economic vision. Facing pressure
from the conservative camp, Deng distanced himself from the affairs of state.
These slow pace of reform was met with stiff resistance from provincial
governors and broke down completely in the early 1990s as a result of the
dissolution of the Soviet Union and Deng's Southern Tour of 1992, designed by
the ailing but influential leader as a means to reinstate his economic reform
agenda. On the tour, Deng criticized the leftist hardliners that had gained
power following the protests, and praised entrepreneurship and other market-
driven policies. Initially ignored by Beijing, the Chinese Politburo eventually
sided with Deng and economic reforms again gained prominence. Hong Kong. In
Hong Kong, the Tiananmen square protests led to fears that the PRC would renege
on its commitments under one country, two systems following the impending
handover in 1997. In response, Governor Chris Patten attempted to expand the
franchise for the Legislative Council of Hong Kong, which led to friction with
Beijing. There have been large candlelight vigils attended by tens of thousands
in Hong Kong every year since 1989 and these vigils have continued following
the transfer of power to the PRC in 1997. Many Hong Kongers see the continued
protests as a symbol of the territory's autonomy and freedom from the
interference from Beijing on political issues. For many Hong Kongers, Tiananmen
served as a turning point for when they lost trust of the Beijing government.
The event, coupled with general uncertainty over the status of Hong Kong after
the transfer of sovereignty, led to a sizeable exodus of Hong Kong people to
Western countries such as Canada and Australia prior to 1997. International
trade. There was a significant impact on the Chinese economy after the
incident. Foreign loans to China were suspended by the World Bank, Asian
Development Bank, and foreign governments; tourism revenue decreased from
US$2.2¬ billion to US$1.8¬ billion; foreign direct investment commitments were
cancelled and there was a rise in defense spending from 8.6% in 1986, to 15.5%
in 1990, reversing a previous 10 year decline. Chinese Premier Li Peng visited
the United Nations Security Council on 31 January 1992, and argued that the
economic and arms embargoes on China were a violation of national sovereignty.
International image. The Tiananmen Square protests damaged the reputation of
China internationally, particularly in the West. Western media covering the
Sino-Soviet Summit in May were in an excellent position to cover some of the
military action live. Protesters seized this opportunity to create signs and
banners designed for international television audiences. Indecision within the
Chinese government over how to handle media coverage of the events also meant a
relatively liberal environment for both domestic and foreign journalists for a
significant portion of the protests. All international networks were eventually
ordered to cease broadcasts from the city during the military action, with the
government shutting down satellite transmissions. Broadcasters attempted to
defy these orders by reporting via telephone. Footage was quickly smuggled out
of the country. The only network which was able to record shots during the
night of 4 June was Televisi√≥n Espa√±ola of Spain (TVE). During the military
action, some foreign journalists faced harassment from authorities. CBS
correspondent Richard Roth and his cameraman were taken into custody while
filing a report from the Square via mobile phone. Images of the protests would
strongly shape Western views and policy toward China in the next two decades.
Of particular significance was the image of "Tank Man", the unknown rebel who
became immortalized in the West as a symbol of civil resistance against a
repressive regime. There was considerable sympathy for the protests among
Chinese students in the West. China's image as a country undergoing modernizing
reforms and an ally against the Soviet Union was replaced by that of a
repressive authoritarian regime. The protests were frequently invoked to argue
against trade liberalization with mainland China and by the United States' Blue
Team as evidence that China was a threat to world peace and US interests. Among
overseas Chinese students, the Tiananmen Square protests triggered the
formation of Internet news services such as the China News Digest and the NGO
China Support Network. In the aftermath of Tiananmen, organizations such as the
China Alliance for Democracy and the Independent Federation of Chinese Students
and Scholars were formed, although these organizations would have limited
political impact beyond the mid-1990s. "Tank Man". The suppression of the
protest was immortalized in Western media by the famous video footage and
photographs of a lone man in a white shirt standing in front of a column of
tanks which were attempting to drive out of Tiananmen Square. The iconic photo
that would eventually make its way around the world was taken on 5 June on
Chang'an Avenue. As the tank driver attempted to go around him, the "Tank Man"
moved into the tank's path. He continued to stand defiantly in front of the
tanks for some time, then climbed up onto the turret of the lead tank to speak
to the soldiers inside. After returning to his position in front of the tanks,
the man was pulled aside by a group of people. What happened to the "Tank Man"
following the demonstration is not known. Some say he was pulled away and went
into hiding, others say he was executed by the authorities. "Time Magazine"
dubbed him "The Unknown Rebel" and later named him one of the . In an interview
with U.S. media, then Chinese President Jiang Zemin said he did not think the
man was killed. Continuing issues. Censorship. The Communist Party of China
(CPC) forbids discussion of the Tiananmen Square protests, and has taken
measures to block or censor information. Textbooks have little, if any,
information related to the protests. Following the protests, officials banned
controversial films and books, and shut down a large number of newspapers.
Within a year, 12 percent of all newspapers, 8 percent of publishing companies,
13 percent of social science periodicals and more than 150 films were banned or
shut down. In addition, the government also announced it had seized 32¬ million
contraband books and 2.4¬ million video and audio cassettes. Access to media
and internet resources on the subject are restricted or blocked by censors. The
party‚Äôs official stance towards the incident is that the use of force was
necessary in order to control a 'political disturbance' and helped to ensure
the stability necessary for economic success. Chinese leaders, including
general secretaries Jiang Zemin and Hu Jintao, reiterate this line when asked
about the question by foreign press. Public memory of the Tiananmen Square
protests has been suppressed by the authorities since 1989. Print media
containing reference to the protests must be consistent with the government‚Äôs
version of events. Presently, many Chinese citizens are reluctant to speak
about the protests due to potential repercussions. However, some individuals do
speak out, such as Ding Zilin of the Tiananmen Mothers organization. Youth in
China are generally unaware of the events that took place, and cannot recognize
symbols such as tank man, or even the date 4 June itself. Internet searches of
'4 June' or 'Tiananmen Square' return censored results or cuts the server
connection temporarily. Specific web pages with select keywords are censored,
while other websites, such as those of overseas Chinese democracy movements,
are blocked wholesale. The censorship, however, has been inconsistent - with
many sites being blocked, unblocked, and re-blocked over the years, including
YouTube, Wikipedia, and Flickr. In addition, the policy is much more stringent
with Chinese-language sites than foreign-language ones. In January 2006, Google
agreed to censor their mainland China site to remove information about
Tiananmen and other subjects considered 'sensitive' by the authorities. Google
withdrew its cooperation on censorship in January 2010. Leading up to and
during the event's 20th anniversary on 4 June 2009, party authorities increased
security around the square. Members of the Public Security Bureau and the
People‚Äôs Armed Police were present at the square in uniform along with
several hundred plain-clothes officers. Journalists were denied entry to the
Square. Those who attempted to film at the Square or interview dissidents were
briefly detained. The anniversary also saw the shut down of global social-
networking sites in China, as well as increased policing of dissidents. No
protests were to be tolerated on this occasion. Censorship does not apply to
Hong Kong and Macau; the two special administrative regions enjoy a high degree
of autonomy and people enjoy freedom of speech and assembly. EU and US arms
embargo. The European Union and United States embargo on armament sales to the
PRC, put in place as a result of the violent suppression of the Tiananmen
Square protests, remains in place today. The PRC has been calling for a lift of
the ban for years and has had a varying amount of support from EU members.
Since 2004, China has portrayed the ban as "outdated", and damaging to China-EU
relations. In early 2004, French President Jacques Chirac spearheaded a
movement within the EU to lift the ban, which was supported by German
Chancellor Gerhard Schr√∂der. However, the passing of the Anti-Secession Law of
the People's Republic of China in March 2005 increased tensions between
mainland China and Taiwan, damaging attempts to lift the ban, and several EU
Council members retracted their support for a lift of the ban. Moreover,
Schroder's successor Angela Merkel opposed lifting the ban. Members of the U.S.
Congress had also proposed restrictions on the transfer of military technology
to the EU if the latter lifted the ban. The UK also opposed the lifting of the
embargo when it took charge of the EU presidency in July 2005. The election of
Jos√© Manuel Barroso as European Commission President also made a lifting of
the ban more difficult, because Barroso is a critic of China's human rights
record. In addition, the European Parliament has consistently opposed the
lifting of the arms embargo to the PRC. Though its agreement is not necessary
for lifting the ban, many argue it reflects the will of the European people
better as it is the only directly elected European body. The European
Parliament has repeatedly opposed any lifting of the arms embargo on the PRC.
The arms embargo has limited China's options from where it may seek military
hardware. Among the sources that were sought included the former Soviet bloc
that it had a strained relationship with as a result of the Sino-Soviet split.
Other willing suppliers have previously included Israel and South Africa, but
American pressure has restricted this co-operation. Compensation. Over the
years some Chinese citizens have called for a reassessment of the protests and
compensation from the government to victims‚Äô families. One group in
particular, Tiananmen Mothers, seeks compensation, vindication for victims and
the right to receive donations from within the mainland and abroad. Zhang
Shijun, a former soldier who was involved in the military crackdown, had
published an open letter to President Hu Jintao seeking to have the government
reevaluate its position on the protests. He was subsequently arrested and taken
from his home. Although the Chinese government never officially acknowledged
wrongdoing when it came to the incident, in April 2006 a payment was made to
the mother of one of the victims, the first publicized case of the government
offering redress to a Tiananmen-related victim's family. The payment was termed
a "hardship assistance", given to Tang Deying (ÂîêÂæ∑Ëã±) whose son, Zhou
Guocong () died at the age of 15 while in police custody in Chengdu on 6 June
1989, two days after the Chinese Army dispersed the Tiananmen protesters. She
was reportedly paid CNY70,000 (approximately $10,250 USD). This has been
welcomed by various Chinese activists, but was regarded by some as a measure to
maintain social stability and not believed to herald a changing of the Party's
official position. United Nations report. The State party should conduct a full
and impartial investigation into the suppression of the Democracy Movement in
Beijing in June 1989, provide information on the persons who are still detained
from that period, inform the family members of their findings, offer apologies
and reparation as appropriate and prosecute those found responsible for
excessive use of force, torture and other illtreatment. In December 2009 the
Chinese Government responded to the Committee‚Äôs recommendations. It stated
that the government had closed the case concerning the ‚Äúpolitical turmoil in
the spring and summer of 1989." It also stated that the ‚Äúpractice of the past
20 years has made it clear that the timely and decisive measures taken by the
Chinese Government at the time were necessary and correct." It claimed that the
labelling of the ‚Äúincident as ‚Äòthe Democracy Movement‚Äô‚Äù is a
‚Äúdistortion of the nature of the incident." According to the Chinese
Government these observations were ‚Äúinconsistent with the Committee‚Äôs
responsibilities." Cultural references. Songs. This event has inspired many
references in music. In May 1989, Hong Kong artistes (including Andy Lau, Sally
Yeh, Roman Tam, Andy Hui, Maria Cordero) gathered to record the song "For
Liberty" (ÁÇ∫Ëá™Áî±) in support of the protesters. The second music video for
Michael Jackson's song "They Don't Care About Us" contains a video clip of the
Tank Man. In their Rome concert on 4 June 1989, British rock band The Cure,
dedicated their last encore, "Faith," to "everyone that died today in China."
In the same year, Joan Baez's song "China" from her album "Speaking of Dreams"
commemorated the event. The second-last historical reference cited in Billy
Joel's "We Didn't Start the Fire", released in September 1989, is "China's
under martial law". Leonard Cohen's song "Democracy" from his 1992 album "The
Future" states that democracy is coming "from those nights in Tiananmen
Square". Progressive rock group Marillion wrote a song titled "The King of
Sunset Town" that uses imagery from Tiananmen Square, such as the line "a
puppet king on the Fourth of June." American rock band The Hooters referred to
the event in their hit song "500 Miles", which is an updated version of the
1960s folk song. The third verse begins with words: "A hundred tanks along the
square, One man stands and stops them there, Someday soon the tide'll turn and
I'll be free." Canadian industrial music group Skinny Puppy's song "Tin Omen"
is about the incident. Its title is a play on words. American thrash metal band
Slayer released a song "Blood Red" on their album "Seasons in the Abyss", which
was inspired by Tiananmen Square. Similarly, Testament's "Seven Days of May"
protested the Beijing massacre. System of a Down's "Hypnotize" on their 2005
album of the same name mentioned Tiananmen Square. Brazilian metal band
Sepultura mentions Tiananmen Square in their song "Refuse/Resist" from their
1993 album "Chaos A.D."; the music video for the song features Tank Man. "Shiny
Happy People" by R.E.M. is supposedly an ironic reference to a piece of roughly
translated Chinese propaganda regarding the massacre, two years before the song
was released. In 1990 the song "Blood Is On the Square" by Philip and Teresa
Morgan about Tiananmen protests was released. American songwriter Mary Chapin
Carpenter references the event in her song "4 June 1989", released in 2010 on
the album "The Age of Miracles". In 1992, Roger Waters released "Amused to
Death", an album which included the song "Watching TV", a rumination on the
Western response to the protests in Tiananmen. In 1996, a song called "The
Tiananmen Man", based on the picture of the Tank Man, appeared on Nevermore's
second album "The Politics of Ecstasy". Television. A primetime special hosted
by Tom Brokaw honored both the Tiananmen Square pro-democracy demonstrations in
Beijing and the fall of the Berlin Wall in that momentous year for human rights
around the world, 1989. CNN news anchor Kyra Phillips drew criticism in March
2006 when she compared the 2006 youth protests in France, in which it was later
determined that no one was killed, to the Tiananmen Square protests, saying
"Sort of brings back memories of Tiananmen Square, when you saw these activists
in front of tanks." CNN's Chris Burns told French Foreign Minister Philippe
Douste-Blazy that her comments were "regrettable" and would receive some
disciplinary actions. In April 2006, the PBS series "Frontline" produced an
episode titled "The Tank Man", which examined his role in the 1989 Tiananmen
Square Protests and the change that has overtaken the PRC economically and
politically since. On 3 June 2009 the BBC aired the documentary "Kate Adie
returns to Tiananmen", in which reporter Kate Adie revisits China and recalls
the events she witnessed in 1989. Paintings and movies. "Execution", a painting
inspired by the event, became the most expensive Chinese contemporary art work
sold in 2007. The movie "Rapid Fire", starring Brandon Lee, depicts images of
the Tiananmen Square killings. In the movie, Brandon Lee's character is the son
of a US government employee who died in the Tiananmen Square massacre. "Summer
Palace" (2006) by Chinese director Lou Ye contains re-enacted scenes from
Beijing streets during the days of the protests in Tiananmen Square. The movie
was banned from public viewing.
