United States presidential election, 2000 The United States presidential
election of 2000 was a contest between Republican candidate George W. Bush, the
governor of Texas and son of former president George H. W. Bush, and Democratic
candidate Al Gore, the Vice President. The incumbent President, Bill Clinton,
was vacating the position after serving the maximum two terms allowed by the
Twenty-second Amendment. Bush narrowly won the November 7 election, with 271
electoral votes to Gore's 266 (with one elector abstaining in the official
tally). The election was noteworthy for a controversy over the awarding of
Florida's 25 electoral votes, the subsequent recount process in that state, and
the unusual event of the winning candidate having received fewer popular votes
than the runner-up. This marked only the fourth election in U.S. history in
which the eventual winner failed to win a plurality of the popular vote (after
the elections of 1824, 1876, and 1888). Later studies have reached conflicting
opinions on who would have won the recount if it had been allowed to proceed.
Democratic Party nomination. Democratic candidates Candidates gallery. Al Gore
of Tennessee was a consistent front-runner for the nomination. Other prominent
Democrats mentioned as possible contenders included Bob Kerrey, Missouri
Congressman Dick Gephardt, Minnesota Senator Paul Wellstone, and famous actor
and director Warren Beatty, who declined to run. Of these, only Wellstone
formed an exploratory committee. In addition to Gore's advantage as the
incumbent Vice President, Bradley was not the candidate of a major faction or
coalition of blocs. Running an insurgency campaign, Bradley positioned himself
as the alternative to Gore, who was a founding member of the centrist
Democratic Leadership Council. While former basketball star Michael Jordan
campaigned for him in the early primary states, Bradley announced his intention
to campaign "in a different way" by conducting a positive campaign of "big
ideas". The focus of his campaign was a plan to spend the record-breaking
budget surplus on a variety of social welfare programs to help the poor and the
middle-class, along with campaign finance reform and gun control. Gore easily
defeated Bradley in the primaries, largely because of support from the
Democratic Party establishment and Bradley's poor showing in the Iowa caucus,
where Gore successfully painted Bradley as aloof and indifferent to the plight
of farmers. The closest Bradley came to a victory was his 50–46 loss to Gore
in the New Hampshire primary. On March 14, Al Gore won the Democratic
nomination. None of Bradley's delegates were allowed to vote for him, so Gore
won the nomination unanimously at the Democratic National Convention.
Connecticut Senator Joe Lieberman was nominated for Vice President by voice
vote. Lieberman became the first Jewish American ever to be chosen for this
position by a major party. Gore chose Lieberman over five finalists. Delegate
totals Republican Party nomination. Candidates gallery. Several Republican
candidates appeared on the national scene to challenge Gore's candidacy. George
W. Bush became the early front-runner, acquiring unprecedented funding and a
broad base of leadership support based on his governorship of Texas and the
name recognition and connections of the Bush family. Former cabinet member
George Shultz played an important early role in securing establishment
Republican support for Bush. In April 1998, he invited Bush to discuss policy
issues with experts including Michael Boskin, John Taylor, and Condoleezza
Rice. The group, which was "looking for a candidate for 2000 with good
political instincts, someone they could work with", was impressed, and Shultz
encouraged him to enter the race. Several aspirants withdrew before the Iowa
Caucus because they were unable to secure funding and endorsements sufficient
to remain competitive with Bush. These included Elizabeth Dole, Dan Quayle,
Lamar Alexander, and Robert C. Smith. Pat Buchanan dropped out to run for the
Reform Party nomination. That left Bush, John McCain, Alan Keyes, Steve Forbes,
Gary Bauer, and Orrin Hatch as the only candidates still in the race. On
January 24, Bush won the Iowa caucus with 41% of the vote. Forbes came in
second with 30% of the vote. Keyes received 14%, Bauer 9%, McCain 5%, and Hatch
1%. Hatch dropped out. On the national stage, Bush was portrayed in the media
as the establishment candidate. McCain, with the support of many moderate
Republicans and Independents, portrayed himself as a crusading insurgent who
focused on campaign reform. On February 1, McCain won a 49%–30% victory over
Bush in the New Hampshire primary. Gary Bauer dropped out. After coming in
third in Delaware Forbes dropped out, leaving three candidates. In the South
Carolina primary, Bush soundly defeated McCain. Some McCain supporters blamed
it on the Bush campaign, accusing them of mudslinging and dirty tricks, such as
push polling that implied that McCain's adopted Bangladeshi-born daughter was
an African-American child he fathered out of wedlock. While McCain's loss in
South Carolina damaged his campaign, he won both Michigan and his home state of
Arizona on February 22. On February 24, McCain criticized Bush for accepting
the endorsement of Bob Jones University despite its policy banning interracial
dating. On February 28, McCain also referred to Rev. Jerry Falwell and
televangelist Pat Robertson as "agents of intolerance", a term he would later
distance himself from during his 2008 bid for the party's nomination. He lost
the state of Virginia to Bush on February 29. On Super Tuesday, March 7, Bush
won New York, Ohio, Georgia, Missouri, California, Maryland, and Maine. McCain
won Rhode Island, Vermont, Connecticut, and Massachusetts, but dropped out of
the race. On March 10, Alan Keyes got 21% of the vote in Utah. Bush took the
majority of the remaining contests and won the Republican nomination on March
14, winning his home state of Texas and his brother Jeb's home state of Florida
among others. At the Republican National Convention in Philadelphia George W.
Bush accepted the nomination of the Republican party. Delegate totals Bush
asked former Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney to head up a team to help select
a running mate for him, but ultimately, Bush decided that Cheney should be the
vice presidential nominee. While the U.S. Constitution does not specifically
disallow a president and a vice president from the same state, it does prohibit
electors from casting both of his or her votes for persons from his or her own
state. Accordingly, Cheney—who had been a resident of Texas for nearly 10
years—changed his voting registration back to Wyoming. Had Cheney not done
this, either he or Bush would have forfeited their electoral votes from the
Texas electors. Notable endorsements. Note: Some of the endorsers switched
positions. Association of State Green Parties nomination. The Greens/Green
Party USA, the then-recognized national party organization, later endorsed
Ralph Nader for president and he appeared on the ballots of 43 states and DC.
Libertarian Party nomination. The Libertarian Party's National Nominating
Convention nominated Harry Browne of Tennessee and Art Olivier of California
for Vice President. Browne was nominated on the first ballot and Olivier
received the Vice Presidential nomination on the second ballot. The Libertarian
Party appeared on 50 of 51 ballots. Constitution Party nomination. The
Constitution Party nominated Howard Phillips of Virginia for a third time and
Curtis Frazier of Missouri. The Constitution Party was on the ballot in 41
states. Natural Law Party nomination. The Natural Law Party held its national
convention in Arlington, Virginia, August 31–September 2, nominating a ticket
of Hagelin/Goldhaber via unanimous decision without a roll-call vote. The party
was on 38 of the 51 ballots nationally. General election campaign. Although the
campaign focused mainly on domestic issues, such as the projected budget
surplus, proposed reforms of Social Security and Medicare, health care, and
competing plans for tax relief, foreign policy was often an issue. Bush
criticized Clinton administration policies in Somalia, where 18 Americans died
in 1993 trying to sort out warring factions, and in the Balkans, where United
States peacekeeping troops perform a variety of functions. "I don't think our
troops ought to be used for what's called nation-building," Bush said in the
second presidential debate. Bush also pledged to bridge partisan gaps in the
nation's capital, claiming the atmosphere in Washington stood in the way of
progress on necessary reforms. Gore, meanwhile, questioned Bush's fitness for
the job, pointing to gaffes made by Bush in interviews and speeches and
suggesting the Texas governor lacked the necessary experience to be president.
Bill Clinton's impeachment and the sex scandal that led up to it cast a shadow
on the campaign, particularly on his vice president's run to replace him.
Republicans strongly denounced the Clinton scandals, particularly Bush, who
made his repeated promise to restore "honor and dignity" to the White House a
centerpiece of his campaign. Gore studiously avoided the Clinton scandals, as
did Lieberman, even though Lieberman had been the first Democratic senator to
denounce Clinton's misbehavior. In fact, some media observers theorized that
Gore actually chose Lieberman in an attempt to separate himself from Clinton's
past misdeeds, and help blunt the GOP's attempts to link him to his boss.
Others pointed to the passionate kiss Gore gave his wife during the Democratic
Convention, as a signal that despite the allegations against Clinton, Gore
himself was a faithful husband. Gore avoided appearing with Clinton, who was
shunted to low visibility appearances in areas where he was popular. Experts
have argued that this cost Gore votes from some of Clinton's core supporters.
Ralph Nader was the most successful of third-party candidates, drawing 2.74
percent of the popular vote. His campaign was marked by a traveling tour of
large "super-rallies" held in sports arenas like Madison Square Garden, with
retired talk show host Phil Donahue as master of ceremonies. After initially
ignoring Nader, the Gore campaign made a pitch to (potential) Nader supporters
in the final weeks of the campaign, downplaying Gore's differences with Nader
on the issues and arguing that Gore's ideas were more similar to Nader's than
Bush's were, and noting that Gore had a better chance of winning than Nader. On
the other side, the Republican Leadership Council ran pro-Nader ads in a few
states in an effort to split the liberal vote. In the aftermath of the
campaign, many Gore supporters claimed that Nader acted as a spoiler in the
election, that Nader votes would have been cast for Gore, and that Nader threw
the election outcome to Bush. Nader dismissed such concerns, claiming his
objective in the campaign was to pass the 5-percent threshold so his Green
Party would be eligible for matching funds in future races. Both vice
presidential candidates Dick Cheney and Joe Lieberman campaigned aggressively
in the 2000 presidential election. Both camps made numerous campaign stops
nationwide, often just missing each other such as when Cheney, Hadassah
Lieberman, and Tipper Gore attended Chicago's Taste of Polonia over Labor Day
Weekend. Presidential debates. The Commission on Presidential Debates, formed
by Democratic and Republican party leaders, set rules that effectively excluded
all but the two major party candidates. Ralph Nader was blocked from attending
a closed circuit screening of the first debate in spite of his holding a
ticket. He was barred from attending an interview near the site of the third
debate in spite of having a "perimeter pass". Nader later sued the CPD for its
role in the former incident. A settlement was reached that included an apology
to Nader. Results. With the exceptions of Florida and Gore's home state of
Tennessee, Bush carried the Southern states by comfortable margins (including
then-President Bill Clinton's home state of Arkansas) and also secured wins in
Ohio, Indiana, most of the rural Midwestern farming states, most of the Rocky
Mountain states, and Alaska. Gore balanced Bush by sweeping the Northeastern
United States (with the sole exception of New Hampshire, which Bush won
narrowly), most of the Upper Midwest, and all of the Pacific Coast states of
Washington, Oregon, and California, and carried Hawaii, as well. As the night
wore on, the returns in a handful of small-to-medium sized states, including
Wisconsin and Iowa, were extremely close; however it was the state of Florida
that would make clear the winner of the election. As the final national results
were tallied the following morning, Bush had clearly won a total of 246
electoral votes, while Gore had won 255 votes. 270 votes were needed to win.
Two smaller states—New Mexico (5 electoral votes) and Oregon (7 electoral
votes)—were still too close to call. It was Florida (25 electoral votes),
however, that the news media focused their attention on. Mathematically,
Florida's 25 electoral votes became the key to an election win for either
candidate. Although both New Mexico and Oregon were declared in favor of Gore
over the next few days, Florida's statewide vote took center stage because that
state's winner would ultimately win the election. The outcome of the election
was not known for more than a month after the balloting ended because of the
extended process of counting and then recounting Florida's presidential
ballots. Florida recount. At approximately 7:50 p.m. EST on election day, 10
minutes before the polls closed in the largely Republican Florida panhandle,
which is in the Central time zone, some television news networks declared that
Gore had carried Florida's 25 electoral votes. They based this prediction
substantially on exit polls. However, in the actual vote tally Bush began to
take a wide lead early in Florida, and by 10 p.m. EST those networks had
retracted that prediction and placed Florida back into the "undecided" column.
At approximately 2:30 a.m., with some 85% of the votes counted in Florida and
Bush leading Gore by more than 100,000 votes, the networks declared that Bush
had carried Florida and therefore had been elected President. However, most of
the remaining votes to be counted in Florida were located in three heavily
Democratic counties—Broward, Miami-Dade, and Palm Beach—and as their votes
were reported Gore began to gain on Bush. By 4:30 a.m., after all votes were
counted, Gore had narrowed Bush's margin to just over 2,000 votes, and the
networks retracted their predictions that Bush had won Florida and the
presidency. Gore, who had privately conceded the election to Bush, withdrew his
concession. The final result in Florida was slim enough to require a mandatory
recount (by machine) under state law; Bush's lead had dwindled to about 300
votes by the time it was completed later that week. A count of overseas
military ballots later boosted his margin to about 900 votes. Most of the post-
electoral controversy revolved around Gore's request for hand recounts in four
counties (Broward, Miami Dade, Palm Beach, and Volusia), as provided under
Florida state law. Florida Secretary of State Katherine Harris announced she
would reject any revised totals from those counties if they were not turned in
by November 14, the statutory deadline for amended returns. The Florida Supreme
Court extended the deadline to November 26, a decision later vacated by the
U.S. Supreme Court. Miami-Dade eventually halted its recount and resubmitted
its original total to the state canvassing board, while Palm Beach County
failed to meet the extended deadline. On November 26, the state canvassing
board certified Bush the winner of Florida's electors by 537 votes. Gore
formally contested the certified results, but a state court decision overruling
Gore was reversed by the Florida Supreme Court, which ordered a recount of over
70,000 ballots previously rejected by machine counters. The U.S. Supreme Court
quickly halted that order the next day with the concurring opinion that a
recount of votes "of questionable legality does [...] threaten irreparable
harm" to Bush as "each manual recount produces a degradation of the ballots."
On December 12, the Supreme Court ruled in a 7–2 vote that the Florida
Supreme Court's ruling requiring a statewide recount of ballots was
unconstitutional, and in a 5–4 vote that the Florida recounts could not be
completed before a December 12 "safe harbor" deadline, and should therefore
cease and the previously certified total should hold. National results. Though
Gore came in second in the electoral vote, he received 543,895 more popular
votes than Bush. Gore failed to win the popular vote in his home state,
Tennessee, which both he and his father had represented in the Senate, making
him the first major-party presidential candidate to have lost his home state
since George McGovern lost South Dakota in 1972. Bush lost in Connecticut, the
state of his birth. Bush is also the first Republican in American history to
win the presidency without winning Vermont or Illinois, the second Republican
to win the presidency without winning California (James A. Garfield in 1880 was
the first), and the only winning Republican not to receive any electoral votes
from California (Garfield received one vote in 1880). '"Source (Electoral and
Popular Vote): Federal Elections Commission Electoral and Popular Vote Summary
(a) "One faithless elector from the District of Columbia, Barbara Lett-Simmons,
abstained from voting in protest of the District's lack of voting
representation in the United States Congress. (D.C. has a non-voting delegate
to Congress.) She had been expected to vote for Gore/Lieberman. (b) results
were Bush 18,075 (51.6%), Gore 16,549 (47.2%), and Browne 420 (1.2%). State
results. Data comes from http://www.fec.gov/pubrec/2000presgeresults.htm, a
U.S. Government document. Aftermath. Post recount. After Florida was decided
and Gore conceded, Texas Governor George W. Bush became the President-elect and
began forming his transition committee. In a speech on December 13, in the
Texas House of Representatives chamber, Bush stated he was reaching across
party lines to bridge a divided America, saying, "the President of the United
States is the President of every single American, of every race, and every
background." On January 6, 2001, a joint session of Congress met to certify the
electoral vote. Twenty members of the House of Representatives, most of them
Democratic members of the Congressional Black Caucus, rose one-by-one to file
objections to the electoral votes of Florida. However, according to an 1877
law, any such objection had to be sponsored by both a representative and a
senator. No senator would co-sponsor these objections, deferring to the Supreme
Court's ruling. Therefore, Gore, who presided in his capacity as President of
the Senate, ruled each of these objections out of order. Subsequently, the
joint session of Congress certified the electoral votes from all 50 states and
the District of Columbia. Bush took the oath of office on January 20, 2001. He
would serve for the next 8 years. Gore declined to run for president in 2004
and 2008. The first independent recount was conducted by The Miami Herald and
USA Today. The Commission found that under most recount scenarios, Bush would
have won the election, but Gore would have won using the most generous
standards. Ultimately, a media consortium — comprising the New York Times,
Washington Post, Wall Street Journal, Tribune Co. (parent of the L.A. Times),
Associated Press, CNN, Palm Beach Post and St. Petersburg Times — hired the
National Opinion Research Center at the University of Chicago to examine
175,010 ballots that were collected from the entire state, not just the
disputed counties that were discounted; these ballots contained undervotes
(votes with no choice made for president) and overvotes (votes made with more
than one choice marked). Their goal was to determine the reliability and
accuracy of the systems used for the voting process. The NORC concluded that if
the disputes over the validity of all the ballots statewide in question had
been consistently resolved and "any" uniform standard applied, the electoral
result would have been reversed and Gore would have won by 107-115 votes if
only two of the three coders had to agree on the ballot. When counting ballots
wherein all three coders agreed, Gore would have won the most restrictive
scenario by 127 votes and Bush would have won the most inclusive scenario by
110 votes. Subsequent analyses cast further doubt on conclusions that Bush
likely would have won anyway, had the U.S. Supreme Court not intervened. An
analysis of the NORC data by University of Pennsylvania researcher Steven F.
Freeman and journalist Joel Bleifuss concluded that a recount of all uncounted
votes using any standard (inclusive, strict, statewide or county by county),
Gore would have been the victor. Such a statewide review including all
uncounted votes was a very real possibility, as Leon County Circuit Court Judge
Terry Lewis, whom the Florida Supreme Court had assigned to oversee the
statewide recount, had scheduled a hearing for December 13 (mooted by the U.S.
Supreme Court's final ruling on the 12th) to consider the question of including
overvotes as well as undervotes, and subsequent statements by Judge Lewis and
internal court documents support the liklihood of including overvotes in the
recount. Florida State University professor of public policy Lance deHaven-
Smith observed that, even considering only undervotes, "under any of the five
most reasonable interpretations of the Florida Supreme Court ruling, Gore does,
in fact, more than make up the deficit." Fairness and Accuracy in Reporting's
analysis of the NORC study and media coverage of it supports these
interpretations and criticizes the coverage of the study by media outlets such
as the New York Times and the other media consortium members. Voting machines.
Because the 2000 presidential election was so close in Florida, the United
States government and state governments pushed for election reform to be
prepared by the 2004 United States Presidential Election. Many of Florida's
year 2000 election night problems stemmed from usability and ballot design
factors with voting systems, including the potentially confusing "butterfly
ballot". Many voters had difficulties with the paper-based punch card voting
machines and were either unable to understand the required process for voting
or unable to perform the process. This resulted in an unusual amount of
overvote (voting for more candidates than is allowed) and undervotes (voting
for fewer than the minimum candidates, including none at all). Many undervotes
were potentially caused by either voter error or errors with the punch card
paper ballots resulting in hanging, dimpled, or pregnant chad. A proposed
solution to these problems was the installation of modern electronic voting
machines. The United States Presidential Election of 2000 spurred the debate
about election and voting reform, but it did not end it. Exit polling and
declaration of vote winners. The Voter News Service's reputation was damaged by
its treatment of Florida's presidential vote in 2000. Breaking its own
guidelines, VNS called the state as a win for Gore 12 minutes before polls
closed in the Florida panhandle. Although most of the state is in the Eastern
Time Zone, counties in the Florida panhandle, located in the Central Time Zone,
had not yet closed their polls. More seriously, inconsistent polling results
caused the VNS to change its call twice, first from Gore to Bush, and then to
"too close to call". Also, charges of media bias were levied against the
networks by Republicans. They claimed that the networks called states more
quickly for Al Gore than for George W. Bush. Congress held hearings on this
matter and the networks claimed to have no intentional bias in their election
night reporting. However, a study of the calls made on election night 2000
indicated that states carried by Gore were called more quickly than states won
by Bush; however, notable Bush states, like New Hampshire and Florida, were
very close, and close Gore states like New Mexico were called late too. More
consequences. In the aftermath of the election, the Help America Vote Act
(HAVA) was passed to help states upgrade their election technology in the hopes
of preventing similar problems in future elections. Unfortunately, the
electronic voting systems that many states purchased to comply with HAVA
actually caused problems in the presidential election of 2004. Many Democrats
blame third party candidate Ralph Nader, claiming he split votes with Gore.
Nader received 97,000 votes in Florida (for comparison, there were 111,251
overvotes). Additionally, Nader received 22,000 votes in New Hampshire, where
Bush beat Gore by 7,000 votes. Either state would have won the election for
Gore. Defenders of Nader, including Dan Perkins, argued that the margin in
Florida was small enough that Democrats could blame any number of third-party
candidates for the defeat, including Workers World Party candidate Monica
Moorehead, who received 1,500 votes. But the controversy with Nader also
drained energy from the Democratic party as divisive debate went on in the
months leading up to the election. Nader's reputation was hurt by this
perception, and may have hindered his goals as an activist. For example,
"Mother Jones" wrote, "For evidence of how rank-and-file liberals have turned
against Nader, one need look no further than the empire he created. Public
Citizen, the organization (Nader) founded in 1971, has a new fundraising
problem—its founder. After the election, contributions dropped... When people
inquire about Nader's relationship to the organization, Public Citizen sends
out a letter that begins with a startling new disclaimer: 'Although Ralph Nader
was our founder, he has not held an official position in the organization since
1980 and does not serve on the board. Public Citizen—and the other groups
that Mr. Nader founded—act independently.'" Democratic party strategist and
Democratic Leadership Council (DLC) chair Al From expressed a different view.
In the January 24, 2001, issue of the DLC's "Blueprint" magazine, he wrote, "I
think they're wrong on all counts. The assertion that Nader's marginal vote
hurt Gore is not borne out by polling data. When exit pollers asked voters how
they would have voted in a two-way race, Bush actually won by a point. That was
better than he did with Nader in the race."
