White supremacy White supremacy is the belief, and/or promotion of the belief,
that white people are superior to people of other racial backgrounds. The term
is sometimes used specifically to describe a political ideology that advocates
the social, political, historical and/or industrial dominance by whites. White
supremacy, as with racial supremacism in general, is rooted in ethnocentrism
and a desire for hegemony and power, and has frequently resulted in violence
against non-whites. Different forms of white supremacy have different
conceptions of who is considered white, and not all white supremacist
organizations agree on who is their greatest enemy. White supremacist groups
can be found in some countries and regions with a significant white population
including Europe, North America, Australia, New Zealand, Latin America, and
South Africa. The militant approach taken by white supremacist groups has
caused them to be watched closely by law enforcement officials. Some have even
been labelled as terrorists. Some European countries have laws forbidding hate
speech, as well as other laws that ban or restrict some white supremacist
organizations. Systemic white supremacy. White supremacy was dominant in the
United States before the American Civil War and for decades after
Reconstruction. In large areas of the United States, this included the holding
of non-whites (specifically African Americans) in chattel slavery. The outbreak
of the Civil War saw the desire to uphold white supremacy cited as a cause for
state secession and the formation of the Confederate States of America. In some
parts of the United States, many people who were considered non-white were
disenfranchised, barred from government office, and prevented from holding most
government jobs well into the second half of the 20th century. Many U.S. states
banned interracial marriage through anti-miscegenation laws until 1967, when
these laws were declared unconstitutional. White leaders often viewed Native
Americans as obstacles to economic and political progress, rather than as
settlers in their own right. White supremacy was also dominant in South Africa
under apartheid and in parts of Europe at various time periods. Governments of
many European-settled countries bordering the Pacific Ocean limited immigration
and naturalization from the Asian Pacific countries, usually on a cultural
basis. South Africa maintained its white supremacist apartheid system until the
early 1990s. Academic use of the term. This and similar definitions are adopted
or proposed by Charles Mills, bell hooks, David Gillborn, and Neely Fuller Jr.
Some anti-racist educators, such as Betita Martinez and the Challenging White
Supremacy workshop, also use the term in this way. The term expresses historic
continuities between a pre-Civil Rights era of open white supremacism and the
current racial power structure of the United States. It also expresses the
visceral impact of structural racism through "provocative and brutal" language
that characterizes racism as "nefarious, global, systemic, and constant."
Academic users of this term sometimes prefer it to "racism" because it allows
for a disconnection between racist feelings and white racial advantage or
privilege. Ideologies and movements.  The eugenicist Madison Grant argued that
the Nordic race had been responsible for most of humanity's great achievements,
and that admixture was "race suicide". In Grant's 1916 book, "The Passing of
the Great Race", Europeans who were not of Germanic origin, but who had Nordic
characteristics such as blonde/red hair and blue/green/gray eyes were
considered to be a Nordic admixture and suitable for Aryanization. In the
United States, the Ku Klux Klan (KKK) is the group most associated with the
white supremacist movement. Many white supremacist groups are based on the
concept of preserving genetic purity, and do not focus solely on discrimination
by skin color. The KKK's reasons for supporting racial segregation are not
primarily based on religious ideals, but some Klan groups are openly
Protestant. The KKK and other white supremacist groups like Aryan Nations, The
Order and the White Patriot Party are considered Anti-Semitic. Christian
Identity is another movement closely tied to white supremacy. Some white
supremacists identify themselves as Odinists, although many Odinists reject
white supremacy. Some white supremacist groups, such as the South African
Boeremag, conflate elements of Christianity and Odinism. The World Church of
the Creator (now called the Creativity Movement) is atheistic and denounces the
Christian religion and other deistic religions. Aside from this, its ideology
is similar to many Christian Identity groups, in their belief that there is a
Jewish conspiracy in control of governments, the banking industry and the
media. Matthew F. Hale, founder of the World Church of the Creator has
published articles stating that all races other than white are "mud races,"
which the religion teaches. The white supremacist ideology has become
associated with a racist faction of the skinhead subculture, despite the fact
that when the skinhead culture first developed in the United Kingdom in the
late 1960s, it was heavily influenced by black fashions and music, especially
Jamaican reggae and ska, and African American soul music By the 1980s, a
sizeable and vocal white power skinhead faction had formed. White supremacist
recruitment tactics are primarily on a grassroots level and on the Internet.
Widespread access to the Internet has led to a dramatic increase in white
supremacist websites. The Internet provides a venue to openly express white
supremacist ideas at little social cost, because people who post the
information are able to remain anonymous. Alliances with black supremacist
groups. Due to some commonly held separatist ideologies, some white supremacist
organizations have found limited common cause with black supremacist or
extremist organizations. In 1961 and 1962 George Lincoln Rockwell, the leader
of the American Nazi Party, was invited to speak by Elijah Muhammad at a Nation
of Islam rally. In 1965, after breaking with the Nation of Islam and denouncing
its separatist doctrine, Malcolm X told his followers that the Nation of Islam
under Elijah Muhammad had made agreements with the American Nazi Party and the
Ku Klux Klan that "were not in the interests of Negros." In 1985 Louis
Farrakhan invited white supremacist Tom Metzger, leader of the White Aryan
Resistance (a neo-Nazi white power group), to attend a NOI gathering. "The
Washington Times" reports Metzger's words of praise: "They speak out against
the Jews and the oppressors in Washington... They are the black counterpart to
us."
