Women's rights Women's rights are the rights and entitlements claimed for women
and girls of many societies worldwide. In some places these rights are
institutionalized or supported by law, local custom, and behaviour, whereas in
others they may be ignored or suppressed. They differ from broader notions of
human rights through claims of an inherent historical and traditional bias
against the exercise of rights by women and girls in favour of men and boys.
Issues commonly associated with notions of women's rights include, though are
not limited to, the right: to bodily integrity and autonomy; to vote
(suffrage); to hold public office; to work; to fair wages or equal pay; to own
property; to education; to serve in the military or be conscripted; to enter
into legal contracts; and to have marital, parental and religious rights.
History of women's rights. China. The status of women in China was low, largely
due to the custom of foot binding. About 45% of Chinese women had bound feet in
the 19th century. For the upper classes, it was almost 100%. In 1912, the
Chinese government ordered the cessation of foot-binding. Foot-binding involved
alteration of the bone structure so that the feet were only about 4 inches
long. The bound feet caused difficulty of movement, thus greatly limiting the
activities of women. Due to the social custom that men and women should not be
near to one another, the women of China were reluctant to be treated by male
doctors of Western Medicine. This resulted in a tremendous need for female
doctors of Western Medicine in China. Thus, female medical missionary Dr. Mary
H. Fulton (1854-1927) was sent by the Foreign Missions Board of the
Presbyterian Church (USA) to found the first medical college for women in
China. Known as the Hackett Medical College for Women (Â§èËëõÂ•≥Â≠êÈÜ´Â≠∏Èô¢),
this College was located in Guangzhou, China, and was enabled by a large
donation from Mr. Edward A.K. Hackett (1851-1916) of Indiana, USA. The College
was aimed at the spreading of Christianity and modern medicine and the
elevation of Chinese women's social status. Greece. The status of women in
ancient Greece varied form city state to city state. Records exist of women in
ancient Delphi, Gortyn, Thessaly, Megara and Sparta owning land, the most
prestigious form of private property at the time. In ancient Athens, women had
no legal personhood and were assumed to be part of the oikos headed by the male
kyrios. Until marriage, women were under the guardianship of their father or
other male relative, once married the husband became a woman‚Äôs kyrios. As
women were barred from conducting legal proceedings, the kyrios would do so on
their behalf. Athenian women had limited right to property and therefore were
not considered full citizens, as citizenship and the entitlement to civil and
political rights was defined in relation to property and the means to life.
However, women could acquire rights over property through gifts, dowry and
inheritance, though her kyrios had the right to dispose of a woman‚Äôs
property. Athenian women could enter into a contract worth less than the value
of a ‚Äúmedimnos of barley‚Äù (a measure of grain), allowing women to engage in
petty trading. Slaves, like women, were not eligible for full citizenship in
ancient Athens, though in rare circumstances they could become citizens if
freed. The only permanent barrier to citizenship, and hence full political and
civil rights, in ancient Athens was gender. No women ever acquired citizenship
in ancient Athens, and therefore women were excluded in principle and practice
from ancient Athenian democracy. By contrast, Spartan women enjoyed a status,
power, and respect that was unknown in the rest of the classical world.
Although Spartan women were formally excluded from military and political life
they enjoyed considerable status as mothers of Spartan warriors. As men engaged
in military activity, women took responsibility for running estates. Following
protracted warfare in the 4th¬ century¬ BC Spartan women owned approximately
between 35% and 40% of all Spartan land and property. By the Hellenistic
Period, some of the wealthiest Spartans were women. Spartan women rarely
married before the age of 20, and unlike Athenian women who wore heavy,
concealing clothes and were rarely seen outside the house, Spartan women wore
short dresses and went where they pleased. Girls as well as boys received an
education, and young women as well as young men may have participated in the
"Gymnopaedia" ("Festival of Nude Youths"). Plato acknowledged that extending
civil and political rights to women would substantively alter the nature of the
household and the state. Aristotle, who had been taught by Plato, denied that
women were slaves or subject to property, arguing that "nature has
distinguished between the female and the slave", but he considered wives to be
"bought". He argued that women's main economic activity is that of safeguarding
the household property created by men. According to Aristotle the labour of
women added no value because "the art of household management is not identical
with the art of getting wealth, for the one uses the material which the other
provides". Contrary to these views, the Stoic philosophers argued for equality
of the sexes, sexual inequality being in their view contrary to the laws of
nature. In doing so, they followed the Cynics, who argued that men and women
should wear the same clothing and receive the same kind of education. They also
saw marriage as a moral companionship between equals rather than a biological
or social necessity, and practiced these views in their lives as well as their
teachings. The Stoics adopted the views of the Cynics and added them to their
own theories of human nature, thus putting their sexual egalitarianism on a
strong philosophical basis. Ancient Rome. Freeborn women of ancient Rome were
citizens who enjoyed legal privileges and protections that did not extend to
non-citizens or slaves. Roman society, however, was patriarchal, and women
could not vote, hold public office, or serve in the military. Women of the
upper classes exercised political influence through marriage and motherhood.
During the Roman Republic, the mother of the Gracchus brothers and of Julius
Caesar were noted as exemplary women who advanced the career of their sons.
During the Imperial period, women of the emperor's family could acquire
considerable political power, and were regularly depicted in official art and
on coinage. Plotina exercised influence on both her husband, the emperor
Trajan, and his successor Hadrian. Her letters and petitions on official
matters were made available to the public ‚Äîan indication that her views were
considered important to popular opinion. A child's citizen status was
determined by that of its mother. Both daughters and sons were subject to
"patria potestas", the power wielded by their father as head of household "
(paterfamilias)". At the height of the Empire (1st‚Äì2nd centuries), the legal
standing of daughters differs little if at all from that of sons. Girls had
equal inheritance rights with boys if their father died without leaving a will.
In the earliest period of the Roman Republic, a bride passed from her father's
control into the "hand" "(manus)" of her husband. She then became subject to
her husband's "potestas", though to a lesser degree than their children. This
archaic form of "manus" marriage was largely abandoned by the time of Julius
Caesar, when a woman remained under her father's authority by law even when she
moved into her husband's home. This arrangement was one of the factors in the
independence Roman women enjoyed relative to those of many other ancient
cultures and up to the modern period: although she had to answer to her father
in legal matters, she was free of his direct scrutiny in her daily life, and
her husband had no legal power over her. When her father died, she became
legally emancipated "(sui iuris)". A married woman retained ownership of any
property she brought into the marriage. Although it was a point of pride to be
a "one-man woman" "(univira)" who had married only once, there was little
stigma attached to divorce, nor to speedy remarriage after the loss of a
husband through death or divorce. Because she remained legally a part of her
birth family, a Roman woman kept her own family name for life. Children most
often took the father's name, but in the Imperial period sometimes made their
mother's name part of theirs, or even used it instead. A Roman mother's right
to own property and to dispose of it as she saw fit, including setting the
terms of her own will, enhanced her influence over her sons even when they were
adults. Because of their legal status as citizens and the degree to which they
could become emancipated, women could own property, enter contracts, and engage
in business. Some acquired and disposed of sizable fortunes, and are recorded
in inscriptions as benefactors in funding major public works. Roman women could
appear in court and argue cases, though it was customary for them to be
represented by a man. They were simultaneously disparaged as too ignorant and
weak-minded to practice law, and as too active and influential in legal
matters‚Äîresulting in an edict that limited women to conducting cases on their
own behalf instead of others'. Even after this restriction was put in place,
there are numerous examples of women taking informed actions in legal matters,
including dictating legal strategy to their male advocates. The first Roman
emperor, Augustus, framed his ascent to sole power as a return to traditional
morality, and attempted to regulate the conduct of women through moral
legislation. Adultery, which had been a private family matter under the
Republic, was criminalized, and defined broadly as an illicit sex act "
(stuprum)" that occurred between a male citizen and a married woman, or between
a married woman and any man other than her husband. That is, a double standard
was in place: a married woman could have sex only with her husband, but a
married man did not commit adultery when he had sex with a prostitute, slave,
or person of marginalized status "(infamis)". Childbearing was encouraged by
the state: the "ius trium liberorum" ("legal right of three children") granted
symbolic honors and legal privileges to a woman who had given birth to three
children, and freed her from any male guardianship. Stoic philosophies
influenced the development of Roman law. Stoics of the Imperial era such as
Seneca and Musonius Rufus developed theories of just relationships. While not
advocating equality in society or under the law, they held that nature gives
men and women equal capacity for virtue and equal obligations to act
virtuously, and that therefore men and women had an equal need for
philosophical education. These philosophical trends among the ruling elite are
thought to have helped improve the status of women under the Empire. Rome had
no system of state-supported schooling, and education was available only to
those who could pay for it. The daughters of senators and knights seem to have
regularly received a primary education (for ages 7 to 12). Regardless of
gender, few people were educated beyond that level. Girls from a modest
background might be schooled in order to help with the family business or to
acquire literacy skills that enabled them to work as scribes and secretaries.
The woman who achieved the greatest prominence in the ancient world for her
learning was Hypatia of Alexandria, who taught advanced courses to young men
and advised the Roman prefect of Egypt on politics. Her influence put her into
conflict with the bishop of Alexandria, Cyril, who may have been implicated in
her violent death in the year 415 at the hands of a Christian mob. Roman law
recognized rape as a crime in which the victim bore no guilt. Rape was a
capital crime. The right to physical integrity was fundamental to the Roman
concept of citizenship, as indicated in Roman legend by the rape of Lucretia by
the king's son. After speaking out against the tyranny of the ruling elite,
Lucretia killed herself as a political and moral protest. Roman authors saw her
self-sacrifice as the catalyst for overthrowing the monarchy and establishing
the republic. As a matter of law, rape could be committed only against a
citizen in good standing. The rape of a slave could be prosecuted only as
damage to her owner's property. Most prostitutes in ancient Rome were slaves,
though some slaves were protected from forced prostitution by a clause in their
sales contract. A free woman who worked as a prostitute or entertainer lost her
social standing and became "infamis", "disreputable"; by making her body
publicly available, she had in effect surrendered her right to be protected
from sexual abuse or physical violence. Attitudes toward rape changed as the
empire came under Christian rule. St. Augustine and other Church Fathers
interpreted Lucretia's rape as perhaps an admission that she had encouraged the
rapist and experienced pleasure. Under Constantine, the first Christian
emperor, if a father accused a man of abducting his daughter, but the daughter
had given her consent to an elopement, the couple were both subject to being
burnt alive. If she had been raped or abducted against her will, she was still
subject to lesser penalties as an accomplice, "on the grounds that she could
have saved herself by screaming for help." Religious scriptures. Bible. See
Women in the Bible "Adam named his wife Eve, because she would become the
mother of all the living." (Genesis 3:20) "Now Deborah, a prophet, the wife of
Lappidoth, was leading Israel at that time." (Judges 4:4) God chose a woman,
Deborah, to lead Israel. Qur'an. The Qur'an, revealed to Muhammad over the
course of 23 years, provide guidance to the Islamic community and modified
existing customs in Arab society. From 610 and 661, known as the early reforms
under Islam, the Qur'an introduced fundamental reforms to customary law and
introduced rights for women in marriage, divorce and inheritance. By providing
that the wife, not her family, would receive a dowry from the husband, which
she could administer as her personal property, the Qur'an made women a legal
party to the marriage contract. While in customary law inheritance was limited
to male descendents, the Qur'an introduced rules on inheritance with certain
fixed shares being distributed to designated heirs, first to the nearest female
relatives and then the nearest male relatives. According to Annemarie Schimmel
"compared to the pre-Islamic position of women, Islamic legislation meant an
enormous progress; the woman has the right, at least according to the letter of
the law, to administer the wealth she has brought into the family or has earned
by her own work." The general improvement of the status of Arab women included
prohibition of female infanticide and recognizing women's full personhood.
Women were generally given greater rights than women in pre-Islamic Arabia and
medieval Europe. Women were not accorded with such legal status in other
cultures until centuries later. According to Professor William Montgomery Watt,
when seen in such historical context, Muhammad "can be seen as a figure who
testified on behalf of women‚Äôs rights." The Middle Ages. According to English
Common Law, which developed from the 12th century onward, all property which a
wife held at the time of a marriage became a possession of her husband.
Eventually English courts forbade a husband's transferring property without the
consent of his wife, but he still retained the right to manage it and to
receive the money which it produced. French married women suffered from
restrictions on their legal capacity which were removed only in 1965. In the
16th century, the Reformation in Europe allowed more women to add their voices,
including the English writers Jane Anger, Aemilia Lanyer, and the prophetess
Anna Trapnell. English and American Quakers believed that men and women were
equal. Many Quaker women were preachers. Despite relatively greater freedom for
Anglo-Saxon women, until the mid-19th century, writers largely assumed that a
patriarchal order was a natural order that had always existed. This perception
was not seriously challenged until the 18th century when Jesuit missionaries
found matrilineality in native North American peoples. 18th and 19th century
Europe. Starting in the late 18th century, and throughout the 19th¬ century,
rights, as a concept and claim, gained increasing political, social and
philosophical importance in Europe. Movements emerged which demanded freedom of
religion, the abolition of slavery, rights for women, rights for those who did
not own property and universal suffrage. In the late 18th century the question
of women's rights became central to political debates in both France and
Britain. At the time some of the greatest thinkers of the Enlightenment, who
defended democratic principles of equality and challenged notions that a
privileged few should rule over the vast majority of the population, believed
that these principles should be applied only to their own gender and their own
race. The philosopher Jean Jacques Rousseau for example thought that it was the
order of nature for woman to obey men. He wrote "Women do wrong to complain of
the inequality of man-made laws" and claimed that "when she tries to usurp our
rights, she is our inferior". ‚ÄúAll citizens including women are equally
admissible to all public dignities, offices and employments, according to their
capacity, and with no other distinction than that of their virtues and
talents‚Äù. De Gouges also draws attention to the fact that under French law
women were fully punishable, yet denied equal rights. Mary Wollstonecraft, a
British writer and philosopher, published "A Vindication of the Rights of
Woman" in 1792, arguing that it was the education and upbringing of women that
created limited expectations. Wollstonecraft attacked gender oppression,
pressing for equal educational opportunities, and demanded "justice!" and
"rights to humanity" for all. Wollstonecraft, along with her British
contemporaries Damaris Cudworth and Catherine Macaulay started to use the
language of rights in relation to women, arguing that women should have greater
opportunity because like men, they were moral and rational beings. "We are
continually told that civilization and Christianity have restored to the woman
her just rights. Meanwhile the wife is the actual bondservant of her husband;
no less so, as far as the legal obligation goes, than slaves commonly so
called." Then a member of parliament, Mill argued that women should be given
the right to vote, though his proposal to replace the term "man" with "person"
in the second Reform Bill of¬ 1867 was greeted with laughter in the House of
Commons and defeated by 76¬ to¬ 196 votes. His arguments won little support
amongst contemporaries but his attempt to amend the reform bill generated
greater attention for the issue of women's suffrage in Britain. Initially only
one of several women‚Äôs rights campaign, suffrage became the primary cause of
the British women‚Äôs movement at the beginning of the 20th century. At the
time the ability to vote was restricted to wealthy property owners within
British jurisdictions. This arrangement implicitly excluded women as property
law and marriage law gave men ownership rights at marriage or inheritance until
the 19th¬ century. Although male suffrage broadened during the century, women
were explicitly prohibited from voting nationally and locally in the 1830s by a
Reform Act and the Municipal Corporations Act. Millicent Fawcett and Emmeline
Pankhurst led the public campaign on women's suffrage and in 1918 a bill was
passed allowing women over the age of 30 to vote. Equal employment rights for
women and men. The rights of women and men to have equal pay and equal benefits
for equal work were openly denied by the British Hong Kong Government up to the
early 1970s. Leslie Wah-Leung Chung (ÈçæËèØ‰∫Æ, 1917-2009), President of the
Hong Kong Chinese Civil Servants‚Äô Association È¶ôÊ∏ØÊîøÂ∫úËèØÂì°ÊúÉ (1965-
68), contributed to the establishment of equal pay for men and women, including
the right for married women to be permanent employees. Before this, the job
status of a woman changed from permanent employee to temporary employee once
she was married, thus losing the pension benefit. Some of them even lost their
jobs. Since nurses were mostly women, this improvement of the rights of married
women meant much to the Nursing profession. Suffrage, the right to vote. During
the 19th century some women began to agitate for the right to vote and
participate in government and law making. Other women opposed suffrage like
Helen Kendrick Johnson, whose prescient 1897 work Woman and the Republic
contains perhaps the best arguments against women's suffrage of the time. The
ideals of women's suffrage developed alongside that of universal suffrage and
today women's suffrage is considered a right (under the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women). During the 19th
century the right to vote was gradually extended in many countries and women
started to campaign for their right to vote. In 1893 New Zealand became the
first country to give women the right to vote on a national level. Australia
gave women the right to vote in 1902. A number of Nordic countries gave women
the right to vote in the early 20th century ‚Äì Finland (1906), Norway (1913),
Denmark and Iceland (1915). With the end of the First World War many other
countries followed ‚Äì the Netherlands (1917), Austria, Azerbaijan, Canada,
Czechoslovakia, Georgia, Poland,and Sweden (1918), Germany and Luxembourg
(1919), and the United States (1920) . Spain gave women the right to vote in
1931, France in 1944, Belgium, Italy, Romania and Yugoslavia in 1946.
Switzerland gave women the right to vote in 1971, and Liechtenstein in 1984. In
Latin America some countries gave women the right to vote in the first half of
the 20th century ‚Äì Ecuador (1929), Brazil (1932), El Salvador (1939),
Dominican Republic (1942), Guatemala (1956) and Argentina (1946). In India,
under colonial rule, universal suffrage was granted in 1935. Other Asian
countries gave women the right to vote in the mid 20th century ‚Äì Japan
(1945), China (1947) and Indonesia (1955). In Africa women generally got the
right to vote along with men through universal suffrage ‚Äì Liberia (1947),
Uganda (1958) and Nigeria (1960). In many countries in the Middle East
universal suffrage was acquired after the Second World War, although in others,
such as Kuwait, suffrage is very limited. On 16 May 2005, the Parliament of
Kuwait extended suffrage to women by a 35‚Äì23 vote. Property rights. During
the 19th century some women in the United States and Britain began to challenge
laws that denied them the right to their property once they married. Under the
common law doctrine of "coverture" husbands gained control of their wives' real
estate and wages. Beginning in the 1840s, state legislatures in the United
States and the British Parliament began passing statutes that protected women's
property from their husbands and their husbands' creditors. These laws were
known as the Married Women's Property Acts. Courts in the 19th-century United
States also continued to require privy examinations of married women who sold
their property. A privy examination was a practice in which a married woman who
wished to sell her property had to be separately examined by a judge or justice
of the peace outside of the presence of her husband and asked if her husband
was pressuring her into signing the document. Modern movements. In the
subsequent decades women's rights again became an important issue in the
English speaking world. By the 1960s the movement was called "feminism" or
"women's liberation." Reformers wanted the same pay as men, equal rights in
law, and the freedom to plan their families or not have children at all. Their
efforts were met with mixed results. In the UK, a public groundswell of opinion
in favour of legal equality had gained pace, partly through the extensive
employment of women in what were traditional male roles during both world wars.
By the 1960s the legislative process was being readied, tracing through MP
Willie Hamilton's select committee report, his equal pay for equal work bill,
the creation of a Sex Discrimination Board, Lady Sear's draft sex anti-
discrimination bill, a government Green Paper of 1973, until 1975 when the
first British Sex Discrimination Act, an Equal Pay Act, and an Equal
Opportunities Commission came into force. With encouragement from the UK
government, the other countries of the EEC soon followed suit with an agreement
to ensure that discrimination laws would be phased out across the European
Community. In the USA, the National Organization for Women (NOW) was created in
1966 with the purpose of bringing about equality for all women. NOW was one
important group that fought for the Equal Rights Amendment (ERA). This
amendment stated that "equality of rights under the law shall not be denied or
abridged by the United States or any state on account of sex." But there was
disagreement on how the proposed amendment would be understood. Supporters
believed it would guarantee women equal treatment. But critics feared it might
deny women the right be financially supported by their husbands. The amendment
died in 1982 because not enough states had ratified it. ERAs have been included
in subsequent Congresses, but have still failed to be ratified. In Ukraine,
FEMEN was founded in 2008. The organisation is internationally known for its
topless protests against sex tourists, international marriage agencies, sexism
and other social, national and international social illnesses. FEMEN has
sympathisers groups in many European countries through social media. Birth
control and reproductive rights. In the 1870s feminists advanced the concept of
"voluntary motherhood" as a political critique of "involuntary motherhood" and
expressing a desire for women's emancipation. Advocates for voluntary
motherhood disapproved of contraception, arguing that women should only engage
in sex for the purpose of procreation and advocated for periodic or permanent
abstinence. In the early 20th century "birth control" was advanced as
alternative to the then fashionable terms "family limitation" and "voluntary
motherhood". The phrase "birth control" entered the English language in 1914
and was popularised by Margaret Sanger, who was mainly active in the US but had
gained an international reputation by the 1930s. The British birth control
campaigner Marie Stopes made contraception acceptable in Britain during the
1920 by framing it in scientific terms. Stopes assisted emerging birth control
movements in a number of British colonies. The birth control movement advocated
for contraception so as to permit sexual intercourse as desired without the
risk of pregnancy. By emphasising "control" the birth control movement argued
that women should have control over their reproduction and the movement had
close ties to the feminist movement. Slogans such as "control over our own
bodies" criticised male domination and demanded women's liberation, a
connotation that is absent from the family planning, population control and
eugenics movements. In the 1960s and 1970s the birth control movement advocated
for the legalisation of abortion and large scale education campaigns about
contraception by governments. In the 1980s birth control and population control
organisations co-operated in demanding rights to contraception and abortion,
with an increasing emphasis on "choice". Birth control has become a major
themes in feminist politics who cited reproduction issues as examples of
women's powerlessness to exercise their rights. The societal acceptance of
birth control required the separation of sex from procreation, making birth
control a highly controversial subject in the 20th century. In a broader
context birth control has become an arena for conflict between liberal and
conservative values, raising questions about family, personal freedom, state
intervention, religion in politics, sexual morality and social welfare.
"Reproductive rights", that is rights relating to sexual reproduction and
reproductive health, were first discussed as a subset of human rights at the
United Nation's 1968 International Conference on Human Rights. Reproductive
rights are not recognised in international human rights law and is an umbrella
term that may include some or all of the following rights: the right to legal
or safe abortion, the right to control one's reproductive functions, the right
to access quality reproductive healthcare, and the right to education and
access in order to make reproductive choices free from coercion,
discrimination, and violence. Reproductive rights may also be understood to
include education about contraception and sexually transmitted infections, and
freedom from coerced sterilization and contraception, protection from gender-
based practices such as female genital mutilation (FGM) and male genital
mutilation (MGM). Reproductive rights are understood as rights of both men and
women, but are most frequently advanced as women's rights. Women's access to
legal abortions is restricted by law in most countries in the world. Where
abortion is permitted by law, women may only have limited access to safe
abortion services. Only a small number of countries prohibit abortion in all
cases. In most countries and jurisdictions, abortion is allowed to save the
pregnant woman's life, or where the pregnancy is the result of rape or incest.
According to Human Rights Watch "Abortion is a highly emotional subject and one
that excites deeply held opinions. However, equitable access to safe abortion
services is first and foremost a human right. Where abortion is safe and legal,
no one is forced to have one. Where abortion is illegal and unsafe, women are
forced to carry unwanted pregnancies to term or suffer serious health
consequences and even death. Approximately 13% of maternal deaths worldwide are
attributable to unsafe abortion‚Äîbetween 68,000 and 78,000 deaths annually."
According to Human Rights Watch "the denial of a pregnant woman's right to make
an independent decision regarding abortion violates or poses a threat to a wide
range of human rights." Other groups however, such as the Catholic Church, the
Christian right and most Orthodox Jews, regard abortion not as a right but as a
'moral evil'. United Nations and World Conferences on Women. In 1946 the United
Nations established a Commission on the Status of Women. Originally as the
Section on the Status of Women, Human Rights Division, Department of Social
Affairs, and now part of the Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC). Since 1975
the UN has held a series of world conferences on women's issues, starting with
the World Conference of the International Women's Year in Mexico City. These
conferences created an international forum for women's rights, but also
illustrated divisions between women of different cultures and the difficulties
of attempting to apply principles universally. Four World Conferences have been
held, the first in Mexico City (International Women's Year, 1975), the second
in Copenhagen (1980) and the third in Nairobi (1985). At the Fourth World
Conference on Women in Beijing (1995), "The Platform for Action" was signed.
This included a commitment to achieve "gender equality and the empowerment of
women". In 2010, UN Women is founded by merging of Division for the Advancement
of Women, International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of
Women, Office of the Special Adviser or Gender Issues Advancement of Women and
United Nations Development Fund for Women by General Assembly Resolution 63/
311. Natural law and women's rights. 17th century natural law philosophers in
Britain and America, such as Thomas Hobbes, Jean-Jacques Rousseau and John
Locke, developed the theory of natural rights in reference to ancient
philosophers such as Aristotle and the Christian theologise Aquinas. Like the
ancient philosophers, 17th century natural law philosophers defended slavery
and an inferior status of women in law. Relying on ancient Greek philosophers,
natural law philosophers argued that natural rights where not derived from god,
but were "universal, self-evident, and intuitive", a law that could be found in
nature. They believed that natural rights were self-evident to "civilised man"
who lives "in the highest form of society". Natural rights derived from human
nature, a concept first established by the ancient Greek philosopher Zeno of
Citium in "Concerning Human Nature". Zenon argued that each rational and
civilized male Greek citizen had a "divine spark" or "soul" within him that
existed independent of the body. Zeno founded the Stoic philosophy and the idea
of a human nature was adopted by other Greek philosophers, and later natural
law philosophers and western humanists. Aristotle developed the widely adopted
idea of rationality, arguing that man was a "rational animal" and as such a
natural power of reason. Concepts of human nature in ancient Greece depended on
gender, ethnic, and other qualifications and 17th century natural law
philosophers came to regard women along with children, slaves and non-whites,
as neither "rational" nor "civilised". Natural law philosophers claimed the
inferior status of women was "common sense" and a matter of "nature". They
believed that women could not be treated as equal due to their "inner nature".
The views of 17th century natural law philosophers were opposed in the 18th and
19th century by Evangelical natural theology philosophers such as William
Wilberforce and Charles Spurgeon, who argued for the abolition of slavery and
advocated for women to have rights equal to that of men. Modern natural law
theorist, and advocates of natural rights, claim that all people have a human
nature, regardless of gender, ethnicity or other qualifications, therefore all
people have natural rights. Human rights and women's rights. Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women. The Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, adopted in 1948, enshrines "the equal rights of
men and women", and addressed both the equality and equity issues. In 1979 the
United Nations General Assembly adopted the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) for legal implementation of
the Declaration on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women. Described
as an international bill of rights for women, it came into force on 3 September
1981. The UN member states that have not ratified the convention are Iran,
Nauru, Palau, Somalia, Sudan, Tonga, and the United States. Niue and the
Vatican City, which are non-member states, have also not ratified it. Any
distinction, exclusion or restriction made on the basis of sex which has the
effect or purpose of impairing or nullifying the recognition, enjoyment or
exercise by women, irrespective of their marital status, on a basis of equality
of men and women, of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political,
economic, social, cultural, civil or any other field. It also establishes an
agenda of action for putting an end to sex-based discrimination for which
states ratifying the Convention are required to enshrine gender equality into
their domestic legislation, repeal all discriminatory provisions in their laws,
and enact new provisions to guard against discrimination against women. They
must also establish tribunals and public institutions to guarantee women
effective protection against discrimination, and take steps to eliminate all
forms of discrimination practiced against women by individuals, organizations,
and enterprises. United Nations Security Council Resolution 1325. On 31 October
2000, the United Nations Security Council unanimously adopted United Nations
Security Council Resolution 1325, the first formal and legal document from the
United Nations Security Council that requires all states respect fully
international humanitarian law and international human rights law appicable to
the rights and protection of women and girls during and after the armed
conflicts. Maputo Protocol. The Protocol to the African Charter on Human and
Peoples‚Äô Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa, better known as the Maputo
Protocol, was adopted by the African Union on 11 July 2003 at its second summit
in Maputo, Mozambique. On 25 November 2005, having been ratified by the
required 15 member nations of the African Union, the protocol entered into
force. The protocol guarantees comprehensive rights to women including the
right to take part in the political process, to social and political equality
with men, and to control of their reproductive health, and an end to female
genital mutilation. Rape and sexual violence. Rape, sometimes called sexual
assault, is an assault by a person involving sexual intercourse with or sexual
penetration of another person without that person's consent. Rape is generally
considered a serious sex crime as well as a civil assault. When part of a
widespread and systematic practice rape and sexual slavery are now recognised
as crime against humanity and war crime. Rape is also now recognised as an
element of the crime of genocide when committed with the intent to destroy, in
whole or in part, a targeted group. Rape as an element of the crime of
genocide. In 1998, the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda established
by the United Nations made landmark decisions that rape is a crime of genocide
under international law. The trial of Jean-Paul Akayesu, the mayor of Taba
Commune in Rwanda, established precedents that rape is an element of the crime
of genocide. The Akayesu judgement includes the first interpretation and
application by an international court of the 1948 Convention on the Prevention
and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide. The Trial Chamber held that rape,
which it defined as "a physical invasion of a sexual nature committed on a
person under circumstances which are coercive", and sexual assault constitute
acts of genocide insofar as they were committed with the intent to destroy, in
whole or in part, a targeted group, as such. It found that sexual assault
formed an integral part of the process of destroying the Tutsi ethnic group and
that the rape was systematic and had been perpetrated against Tutsi women only,
manifesting the specific intent required for those acts to constitute genocide.
Judge Navanethem Pillay said in a statement after the verdict: ‚ÄúFrom time
immemorial, rape has been regarded as spoils of war. Now it will be considered
a war crime. We want to send out a strong message that rape is no longer a
trophy of war.‚Äù Rape and sexual enslavement as crime against humanity. The
Rome Statute Explanatory Memorandum, which defines the jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Court, recognises rape, sexual slavery, enforced
prostitution, forced pregnancy, enforced sterilization, "or any other form of
sexual violence of comparable gravity" as crime against humanity if the action
is part of a widespread or systematic practice. The Vienna Declaration and
Programme of Action also condemn systematic rape as well as murder, sexual
slavery, and forced pregnancy, as the "violations of the fundamental principles
of international human rights and humanitarian law." and require a particularly
effective response. Rape was first recognised as crime against humanity when
the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia issued arrest
warrants based on the Geneva Conventions and Violations of the Laws or Customs
of War. Specifically, it was recognised that Muslim women in Foca (southeastern
Bosnia and Herzegovina) were subjected to systematic and widespread gang rape,
torture and sexual enslavement by Bosnian Serb soldiers, policemen, and members
of paramilitary groups after the takeover of the city in April 1992. The
indictment was of major legal significance and was the first time that sexual
assaults were investigated for the purpose of prosecution under the rubric of
torture and enslavement as a crime against humanity. The indictment was
confirmed by a 2001 verdict by the International Criminal Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia that rape and sexual enslavement are crimes against humanity.
This ruling challenged the widespread acceptance of rape and sexual enslavement
of women as intrinsic part of war. The International Criminal Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia found three Bosnian Serb men guilty of rape of Bosniac
(Bosnian Muslim) women and girls (some as young as 12 and 15 years of age), in
Foca, eastern Bosnia and Herzegovina. Furthermore two of the men were found
guilty of the crime against humanity of sexual enslavement for holding women
and girls captive in a number of de facto detention centres. Many of the women
subsequently disappeared.
