Adventism Adventism is a Christian movement which began in the 19th century, in
the context of the Second Great Awakening revival in the United States. The
name refers to belief in the imminent Second Coming (or "Second Advent") of
Jesus Christ. It was started by William Miller, whose followers became known as
Millerites. Today, the largest church within the movement is the Seventh-day
Adventist Church. The Adventist family of churches is regarded today as
conservative Protestants. Although these churches hold much in common, their
theology differs on whether the intermediate state is unconscious sleep or
consciousness, whether the ultimate punishment of the wicked is annihilation or
eternal torment, the nature of immortality, whether or not the wicked are
resurrected after the millennium, and whether the sanctuary of refers to the
one in heaven or one on earth. The movement has encouraged the examination of
the whole bible, leading them to observe the Sabbath. History. Adventism began
as an inter-denominational movement. Its most vocal leader was William Miller.
Between 50,000 and 100,000 people in the United States supported Miller's
predictions of Christ's return. After the "Great Disappointment" of October 22,
1844 many people in the movement gave up on Adventism. Of those remaining
Adventist, the majority gave up believing in any prophetic (biblical)
significance for the October 22 date, yet they remained expectant of the near
Advent (second coming of Jesus). Of those who retained the October 22 date,
many maintained that Jesus had come not literally but "spiritually", and
consequently were known as "spiritualizers". A small minority held that
something concrete had indeed happened on October 22, but this event had been
misinterpreted. This viewpoint later emerged and crystallized with the Seventh-
day Adventist Church, the largest remaining body today. Albany Conference. The
Albany Conference in 1845, attended by 61 delegates, was called to attempt to
determine the future course and meaning of the Millerite movement. Following
this meeting, the "Millerites" then became known as "Adventists" or "Second
Adventists". However, the delegates disagreed on several theological points.
Four groups emerged from the conference: The Evangelical Adventists, The Life
and Advent Union, the Advent Christian Church, and the Seventh-day Adventist
Church. The largest group organized as the American Millennial Association, a
portion of which was later known as the Evangelical Adventist Church. Unique
among the Adventists, they believed in an eternal hell and consciousness in
death. They declined in numbers, and by 1916 their name did not appear in the
United States Census of Religious Bodies. It has diminished to almost non-
existence today. Their main publication was the "Advent Herald", of which
Sylvester Bliss was the editor until his death in 1863. It was later called the
"Messiah’s Herald". The Life and Advent Union was founded by George Storrs in
the year of 1863. He had established "The Bible Examiner" in 1842. It merged
with the Adventist Christian Church in 1964. The Advent Christian Church
officially formed in 1861, and grew rapidly at first. It declined a little over
the 20th century. The Advent Christians publish the four magazines "The Advent
Christian Witness", "Advent Christian News", "Advent Christian Missions" and
"Maranatha". They also operate a liberal arts college at Aurora, Illinois; and
a Bible College at Lennox, Massachusetts. The Primitive Advent Christian Church
later separated from a few congregations in West Virginia. The Seventh-day
Adventist Church officially formed in 1863. It believes in the sanctity of the
seventh-day Sabbath as a holy day for worship. It published the "Adventist
Review and Sabbath Herald". It has grown to a large worldwide denomination and
has a significant network of medical and educational institutions. Miller did
not join any of the movements, and spent the last few years of his life working
for unity, before dying in 1849. Denominations. Christadelphians. The
Christadelphians, were founded in 1844 and had an estimated 25,000 members in
170 ecclesias, or churches in 2000 in America. Advent Christian Church. The
Advent Christian Church was founded in 1860 and had 25,277 members in 302
churches in 2002 in America. It is a "first-day" body of Adventist Christians
founded on the teachings of William Miller. They adopted the "conditional
immortality" views of Charles F. Hudson and George Storrs formed the "Advent
Christian Association" in Salem, Massachusetts in 1860. Primitive Advent
Christian Church. The Primitive Advent Christian Church is a small group which
separated from the Advent Christian Church. They differ from the parent body
mainly in two points. They observe feet washing as a rite of the church, and
they teach that reclaimed backsliders should be baptized (even though they had
formerly been baptized). This is sometimes referred to as rebaptism. Seventh-
day Adventist. The Seventh-day Adventist Church, founded in 1863, and had
16,600,000 baptized members (not counting children of members) worldwide as of
2010 is best known for its teaching that Saturday, the seventh day of the week,
is the Sabbath and is the appropriate day for worship. Seventh Day Adventist
Reform Movement. The Seventh Day Adventist Reform Movement is a small offshoot
with an unknown number of members from the Seventh-day Adventist Church caused
by disagreement over military service on the Sabbath day during World War I.
Davidian Seventh-day Adventist Association. The Davidians (originally named
Shepherd's Rod) is a small offshoot with an unknown number of members made up
primarily of voluntarily disfellowshipped members of the Seventh-day Adventist
Church. They were originally known as the Shepherd's Rod and are still referred
to as such. The group derives its name from two books on Bible doctrine written
by their founder, Victor Houteff, in 1929. Branch Davidians. The Branch
Davidians were a split ("branch") from the Davidians. Many of them perished in
the infamous Waco Siege of 1993. Church of God (Seventh Day). The Church of God
(Seventh-Day) was founded 1863 with an estimated 11,000 members in 185 churches
in 1999 in America. They separated in 1858 from those Adventists associated
with Ellen White who later organized as Seventh-day Adventists in 1863. The
Church of God (Seventh Day) split in 1933, creating two bodies: one
headquartered in Salem, West Virginia, and known as the Church of God (7th day)
- Salem Conference and the other one headquartered in Denver, Colorado and
known as the General Conference of the Church of God (Seventh-Day). The
Worldwide Church of God splintered from this. Church of God and Saints of
Christ. The Church of God and Saints of Christ was founded 1896 and had an
estimated 40,000 members in approximately 200 congregations in 1999 in America.
Church of God General Conference. Many denominations known as "Church of God"
have Adventist origins. The Church of God General Conference was founded in
1921 and had 7,634 members in 162 churches in 2004 in America. It is an
Adventist Christian body which is also known as the "Church of God of the
Abrahamic Faith" and the "Church of God General Conference (Morrow, GA)".
United Seventh-Day Brethren. The United Seventh-Day Brethren is a small
Sabbatarian Adventist body. In 1947, several individuals and two independent
congregations within the Church of God Adventist movement formed the "United
Seventh-Day Brethren", seeking to increase fellowship and to combine their
efforts in evangelism, publications, and other ministries. Worldwide Church of
God. The Worldwide Church of God was founded 1933 and had an estimated 63,000
members worldwide in 2004. United Church of God. Following massive doctrinal
changes in the Worldwide Church of God, numerous groups split off to retain a
more traditional system. The United Church of God founded in 1995 is the
largest such offshoot. Other relationships. The Bible Students movement founded
by Charles Taze Russell had in its early development close connections with the
Millerite movement and stalwarts of the Adventist faith, including George
Storrs and Joseph Seiss. The various groupings of Bible Students currently have
a cumulative membership of less than 20,000 worldwide. Although the Jehovah's
Witnesses (who emerged in 1931 following a schism in the Bible Students
movement that began in 1917) and remaining Bible Students are not generally
regarded as part of the Millerite Adventist movement, Russell attended and
eventually led an Adventist oriented Bible study church from 1870–74. Avowing
his indebtedness to Adventism, he "was deeply influenced by Adventist
thoughts." As of December 2008 there were approximately 7 million Jehovah's
Witnesses worldwide.
