Anti-Judaism Anti-Judaism has been called "a total or partial opposition to
Judaism—and to Jews as adherents of it—by persons who accept a competing
system of beliefs and practices and consider certain genuine Judaic beliefs and
practices as inferior." Anti-Judaism--based on religious beliefs and practices-
-is often distinguished from anti-semitism, which is based upon racial or
ethnic prejudice. Anti-Judaism in the pre-Christian Roman Empire. In Rome and
throughout the Roman Empire, religion was an integral part of the civil
government, see Religion in ancient Rome. Emperors proclaimed themselves as
gods on Earth, and demanded to be worshiped accordingly. This created religious
difficulties for Jews and worshipers of Mithras, Sabazius and Early Christians.
Jews were prohibited by their biblical commandments from worshiping any other
god than that of the Torah (see Shema, God in Judaism, Idolatry in Judaism).
The "Crisis under Caligula" (37-41) has been proposed as the "first open break
between Rome and the Jews", even though problems were already evident during
the Census of Quirinius in 6 and under Sejanus (before 31). After the Jewish-
Roman wars (66-135), Hadrian changed the name of Iudaea province to "Syria
Palaestina" and Jerusalem to "Aelia Capitolina" in an attempt to erase the
historical ties of the Jewish people to the region. In addition, after 70, Jews
and Jewish Proselytes were only allowed to practice their religion if they paid
the Jewish tax, and after 135 were barred from Jerusalem except for the day of
Tisha B'Av. Flavius Clemens was put to death for "living a Jewish life" or
"drifting into Jewish ways" in the year 95 CE, which may well have been related
to the administration of the Jewish tax under Domitian. The Roman Empire
adopted Christianity as its state religion with the Edict of Thessalonica on 27
February 380, see State church of the Roman Empire. History of Christian anti-
Judaism. Early Christianity and the Judaizers. Christianity commenced its
existence in the 1st century as a sect within Judaism, so-called Jewish
Christianity. It was seen as such by the early Christians, as well as Jews in
general. The wider Roman administration most likely would not have understood
any distinction. Historians debate whether or not the Roman government
distinguished between Christians and Jews prior to Nerva's modification of the
Jewish Tax in 96. From then on, practising Jews paid the tax; Christians did
not. Christianity is based on Jewish monotheism, scriptures (generally the
Septuagint or Targum translations of the Hebrew Bible), liturgy, and morality.
The main point of divergence by the Early Christian community from its Jewish
roots was the Christian belief that Jesus was the long awaited Messiah (see
Rejection of Jesus). Another point of divergence was the questioning by the
Christian community of the continuing applicability of the Law of Moses (the
Torah), though the Apostolic Decree of the Apostolic Age of Christianity
appears to parallel the Noahide Law of Judaism. The two issues came to be
linked in a theological discussion within the Christian community as to whether
the coming of the Messiah (First or Second Coming) could or did annul some (see
Cafeteria Christianity) or all (see Antinomianism) biblical law in what came to
be called a New Covenant. The circumcision controversy was probably the second
issue (after the issue of Jesus as messiah) during which the theological
argument was conducted in terms of anti-Judaism, with those who argued for the
view that biblical law continued to be applicable being labelled "Judaizers" or
"Pharisees" (e.g. ). The teachings of Paul (d. ~67 CE), whose letters comprise
much of the New Testament demonstrate a "long battle against Judaizing."
However, James the Just, who after Jesus's death was widely acknowledged as the
leader of the Jerusalem Christians, worshiped at the Second Temple in Jerusalem
until his death in 62, thirty years after Jesus' death. The destruction of the
Second Temple in 70 CE would lead Christians to "doubt the efficacy of the
ancient law", see also Supersessionism, though Ebionism would linger on until
the fifth century. However, Marcion of Sinope, who advocated rejecting the
entirety of Judaic influence on the Christian faith, would be excommunicated by
the Church in Rome in 144 CE. Anti-Judaic polemic. Anti-Judaic works of this
period include ' by Tertullian, ' by Minucius Felix, "" by Cyprian of Carthage,
and "Instructiones Adversus Gentium Deos" by Lactantius. The traditional
hypothesis holds that the anti-Judaism of these early fathers of the Church
"were inherited from the Christian tradition of Biblical exegesis" though a
second hypothesis holds that early Christian anti-Judaism was inherited from
the pagan world. Taylor has observed that theological Christian anti-Judaism
"emerge from the church's efforts to resolve the contradictions inherent in its
simultaneous appropriation and rejection of different elements of the Jewish
tradition." Modern scholars believe that Judaism may have been a missionary
religion in the early centuries of the common era, converting so-called
proselytes, and thus competition for the religious loyalties of gentiles drove
anti-Judaism. The debate and dialogue moved from polemic to bitter verbal and
written attacks one against the other. To Tarfon (d. 135 CE) is attributed a
statement about whether scrolls could be left to burn in a fire on the Sabbath.
A disputed interpretation identifies these books with the Gospels (see
Gilyonim): "The Gospels must be burned for paganism is not as dangerous to the
Jewish faith as Jewish Christian sects." The anonymous "Letter to Diognetus"
was the earliest apologetic work in the early Church to address Judaism. Saint
Justin Martyr (d. 165 CE) wrote the apologetic "", a polemical debate giving
the Christian assertions for the Messiahship of Jesus by making use of the Old
Testament contrasted with counter-arguments from a fictionalized version of
Tarphon. "For centuries defenders of Christ and the enemies of the Jews
employed no other method" than these apologetics. Apologetics were difficult as
gentile converts could not be expected to understand Hebrew; translations of
the Septuagint into Greek prior to Aquila would serve as a flawed basis for
such cross-cultural arguments, as demonstrated by Origen's difficulties
debating Rabbi Simlai. Though Emperor Hadrian was an "enemy of the synagogue",
the reign of Antonius began a period of Roman benevolence toward the Jewish
faith. Meanwhile, imperial hostility toward Christianity continued to
crystallize; after Decius, the empire was at war with it. An unequal power
relationship between Jews and Christians in the context of the Greco-Roman
world "generated anti-Jewish feelings among the early Christians. Feelings of
mutual hatred arose, driven in part by Judaism's legality in the Roman Empire;
in Antioch, where the rivalry was most bitter, Jews most likely demanded the
execution of Polycarp. From Constantine to the eighth century. When Constantine
and Licinius were issuing the Edict of Milan, the influence of Judaism was
fading in the Land of Israel (in favor of Christianity) and seeing a rebirth
outside the Roman Empire in Babylonia. By the third century the Judaizing
heresies were nearly extinct in Christianity. The Council of Nicaea ended
Passover celebrations for Christians. After his defeat of Licinius in 323 CE,
Constantine showed Christians marked political preference. He repressed Jewish
proselytism and forbade Jews from circumcising their slaves. Jews were barred
from Jerusalem except on the anniversary of the Second Temple's destruction
(Tisha B'Av) and then only after paying a special tax (probably the Fiscus
Judaicus) in silver. He also promulgated a law which condemned to the stake
Jews who persecuted their apostates by stoning. Christianity became the state
religion of the Roman Empire (see Christendom). "No sooner was Church armed
than it forgot its most elementary principles, and directed the secular arm
against its enemies." From the middle of the 5th century, apologetics ceased
with Cyril of Alexandria. This form of anti-Judaism had proven futile and often
served to strengthen Jewish faith. With Christianity ascendant in the Empire,
the "Fathers, the bishops, and the priest who had to contend against the Jews
treated them very badly. Hosius in Spain; Pope Sylvester I; Eusebius of
Caesaria call them 'a perverse, dangerous, and criminal sect.'" While Gregory
of Nyssa merely reproaches Jews as infidels, other teachers are more vehement.
St. Augustine labels the Talmudists as falsifiers; St. Ambrose recycled the
earlier anti-Christian trope and accuses Jews of despising Roman law. St.
Jerome claims Jews were possessed by an impure spirit. St. Cyril of Jerusalem
claimed the Jewish Patriarchs, or Nasi, were a low race. All these theological
and polemical attacks combined in St. John Chrysostom's six sermons delivered
at Antioch. Chrysostom, an archbishop of Constantinople, (d. 407 CE) is very
negative in his treatment of Judaism, though much more hyperbolic in
expression. While St. Justin's "Dialogue" is a philosophical treatise, St.
Chrysostom's homilies "Against the Jews" are a more informal and rhetorically
forceful set of sermons preached in church. Delivered while Chrysostom was
still a priest in Antioch, his homilies deliver a scathing critique of Jewish
religious and civil life, warning Christians not to have any contact with
Judaism or the synagogue and to keep away from the rival religion's festivals.
"There are legions of theologians, historians and writers who write about the
Jews the same as Chrysostom: Epiphanius, Diodorus of Tarsus, Theodore of
Mopsuestia, Theodoret of Cyprus, Cosmas Indicopleustes, Athanasius the Sinaite
among the Greeks; Hilarius of Poitiers, Prudentius, Paulus Orosius, Sulpicius
Severus, Gennadius, Venantius Fortunatus, Isidore of Seville, among the
Latins." From the 4th to 7th centuries, while the bishops opposed Judaism in
writing, the Empire enacted a variety of civil laws against Jews, such as
forbidding them from holding public office, and an oppressive curial tax. Laws
were enacted to harass their free observance of religion; Justinian went so far
as to enact a law against Jewish daily prayers. Both Christians and Jews
engaged in recorded mob violence in the waning days of the Empire. The pattern
wherein Jews were relatively free under pagan rulers until the Christian
conversion of the leadership, as seen with Constantine, would be repeated in
the lands beyond the now collapsed Roman Empire. Sigismund of Burgundy enacted
laws against Jews after coming to the throne after his conversion in 514;
likewise after the conversion of Reccared, king of the Visigoths in 589, which
would have lasting effect when codified by Reccesuinth in the Visigothic Code
of Law. This code inspired Jews to aid Tariq ibn-Ziyad (a Muslim) in his
overthrow of Roderick, and under the Moors (also Muslims), Jews regained their
usurped religious freedoms. After the 8th century. Beginning with the eighth
century, legislation against heresies grew more severe. The Church, once
confining itself to only the powers of canon law, increasingly appealed to
secular powers. Heretics such as the Vaudois, Albigenses, Beghards, Apostolic
Brothers, and Luciferians were thus "treated with cruelty" which culminated in
the 13th century establishment of the Inquisition by Pope Innocent III. Jews
were not ignored by such legislation, either, as they allegedly instigated
Christians to judaizations, either directly or unconsciously, by their
existence. They sent forth metaphysicians such as Amaury de Béne and David de
Dinan; the Pasagians followed Mosaic Law; the Orleans heresy was a Jewish
heresy; the Albigens taught Jewish doctrine as superior to Christian; the
Dominicans preached against both the Hussites and their Jewish supporters, and
thus the imperial army sent to advance on Jan Ziska massacred Jews along the
way. In Spain, where Castilian custom (fueros) had granted equal rights to
Muslims, Christians, and Jews, Gregory XI instituted the Spanish Inquisition to
spy on Jews and Moors wherever "by words or writings they urged the Catholics
to embrace their faith". Usury became a proximate cause of much anti-Jewish
sentiment during the Middle Ages. In Italy and later Poland and Germany, John
of Capistrano stirred up the poor against the usury of the Jews; Bernardinus of
Feltre, aided by the practical notion of establishing mont-de-piétés, called
for the expulsion of Jews all over Italy and Tyrol and caused the massacre of
the Jews at Trent. Kings, nobles, and bishops discouraged this behavior,
protecting Jews from the monk Radulphe in Germany and countering the preachings
of Bernardinus in Italy. These reactions were from knowing the history of mobs,
incited against Jews, continuing attacks against their rich co-religionists.
Anti-Judaism was a dynamic in the early Spanish colonies in the Americas, where
Europeans used anti-Judaic memes and forms of thinking against Native and
African peoples, in effect transferring anti-Judaism onto other peoples. The
Church kept to its theological anti-Judaism and, favoring the mighty and rich,
was careful not to encourage the passions of the people. But while it sometimes
interfered on behalf of the Jews when they were the objects of mob fury, it was
at the same time fueled the fury by combating Judaism. In the Reformation.
Martin Luther has been accused of antisemitism, primarily in relation to his
statements about Jews in his book "On the Jews and their Lies", which describes
the Jews in extremely harsh terms, excoriating them, and providing detailed
recommendation for a pogrom against them and their permanent oppression and/or
expulsion. According to Paul Johnson, it "may be termed the first work of
modern anti-Semitism, and a giant step forward on the road to the Holocaust".
In contrast, Roland Bainton, noted church historian and Luther biographer,
wrote "One could wish that Luther had died before ever this tract was written.
His position was entirely religious and in no respect racial". Peter Martyr
Vermigli, a shaper of Reformed Protestantism, took pains to maintain the
contradiction, going back to Paul of Tarsus, of Jews being both enemy and
friend, writing: "The Jews are not odious to God for the very reason they are
Jews; for how could this have happened since they were embellished with so many
great gifts..." Contrasted with antisemitism. "The question of the relation of
traditional Christian anti-Judaism and modern antisemitism" has "ignite
explosive debates" among scholars. Whereas, according to historian Gavin
Langmuir, anti-Judaism is concerned with exaggerated accusations against Jews
which nonetheless contain a particle of truth or evidence, antisemitism (which
dates back in Europe to the 12th and 13th centuries) reaches beyond unusual
general inferences and is concerned with false suppositions. Thus Langmuir
considers the labelling of Jews as 'Christ-killers' is anti-Judaic; accusations
of well-poisoning, on the other hand, he regards as antisemitic. In his view,
anti-Judaism and antisemitism have existed side by side from the 12th century
onwards and have strengthened each other ever since. The blood libel is another
example of antisemitism, though it is based in distorted notions of Judaism.
Anti-Judaism is also often distinguished from antisemitism based upon racial or
ethnic grounds (racial antisemitism). "The dividing line was the possibility of
effective conversion . . . a Jew ceased to be a Jew upon baptism." However,
with racial antisemitism, "Now the assimilated Jew was still a Jew, even after
baptism ... . From the Enlightenment onward, it is no longer possible to draw
clear lines of distinction between religious and racial forms of hostility
towards Jews... Once Jews have been emancipated and secular thinking makes its
appearance without leaving behind the old Christian hostility towards Jews, the
new term antisemitism becomes almost unavoidable, even before explicitly racist
doctrines appear." At several points in the history of Christianity,
Chrysostom's and Luther's writings have been used to justify antisemitism.
Islamic anti-Judaism. A prominent place in the Qur'anic polemic against the
Jews is given to the conception of the religion of Abraham. The Qur'an presents
Muslims as neither Jews nor Christians but followers of Abraham who was in a
physical sense the father of the Jews and the Arabs and lived before the
revelation of Torah. In order to show that the religion practiced by the Jews
is not the pure religion of Abraham, the Qur'an mentions the incident of
worshiping of the calf, argues that Jews do not believe in part of the
revelation given to them, and that their taking of usury shows their
worldliness and disobedience of God. Furthermore, the Quran claim they
attribute to God what he has not revealed. In his polemic against Judaism, Ibn
Hazm provided a polemical list of what he considered "chronological and
geographical inaccuracies and contradictions; theological impossibilities
(anthropomorphic expressions, stories of fornication and whoredom, and the
attributing of sins to prophets), as well as lack of reliable transmission
(tawatur) of the text".
