Apollo Quiboloy Apollo Carreon Quiboloy is the founder and leader of the
Philippines-based Restorationist Christian church, the Kingdom of Jesus Christ,
The Name Above Every Name, Inc. He has made claims that he is the "Appointed
Son of God". Early years. Quiboloy was born on April 25, 1950 in a small
village in the foothills of Mt. Apo in Tamayong, Calinan, Davao City,
Philippines, and is the youngest of nine children of Kapampangans José
Quiboloy and María Carreon. Both natives of Lubao, Pampanga, his parents had
migrated to Davao just after World War II to find better jobs. Church. Quiboloy
is the religious leader of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, The Name Above Every
Name, Inc founded on September 1, 1985. He started to preach in the slums of
Villamor, Agdao, Davao City with only 15 members. His church is located along
Buhangin road in Davao City. He owns a large mansion, referred to as "New
Jerusalem". Quiboloy’s sect has a television channel, the ACQ-Kingdom
Broadcasting Network and 17 radio stations in the Philippines. The sect also
has two newspapers: Pinas and Sikat. Pinas is internationally circulated weekly
for followers in North and South America, Europe, the Middle East, Africa,
Australia, New Zealand and Asia. His followers refer to their community as a
“Kingdom Nation.” They claim about 2 million “Kingdom citizens” abroad
and 4 million in the Philippines. On weekdays, members hold bible sessions and
prayer services. On Sundays, a “Global Worship” is held at the Kingdom’s
Cathedral in Buhangin District. Members pay tithes representing 10 percent of
their incomes. In 2000, Quiboloy founded Jose Maria College, named after his
parents. He has received critical responses to his claims of being the
"Appointed Son of God". Personal life. Quiboloy has never been married and has
no children. Political involvement. Quiboloy anointed Gilbert Teodoro as the
next president in the 2010 Philippine presidential election. “Tonight let it
be known to all Filipinos that the Almighty Father has appointed the president
of this nation. He is no other than Gilbert “Gibo” Teodoro,” Quiboloy
told thousands of cheering followers. Teodoro finished fourth in the election
with 4,095,839 votes (or 11.33%) to which Quiboloy responded, “I myself am a
little bit disturbed with the reports of fraud and cheating in the last
elections. Even I am asking where did the votes of the Kingdom go? What
happened to our votes when we were supposed to be solid for Gibo?”
Controversies. Quiboloy has been sued by a former member for allegedly
brainwashing and holding her young daughter against her will. The communist New
People's Army (NPA) has accused Apollo Quiboloy of being behind the massacre of
K’lata-Bagobos leader Datu Domingo Diarog and his family on April 29, 2008
for allegedly refusing to sell two hectares of their property for P50,000 to
Quiboloy and his sect. The property is within the 700-hectare ancestral domain
claimed by the Bagobo people in Tugbok and is adjacent to Quiboloy's walled
“prayer mountain” in Tamayong. Diarog's widow said followers of Quiboloy
had threatened to evict them from the land and her relatives were even offered
P20,000 for Diarog's head. Quiboloy, however, said the charges are ""totally
false and baseless, if not ridiculous."" While Quiboloy has branded the rebels
“"mga anak ni Satanas"” (Satan’s offsprings), the NPA has declared him a
“"warlord in the service of the Gloria Arroyo administration’s policies
against the peasants and indigenous peoples."” Quiboloy also said on his
television program that ""he could arm 20,000 of his followers with M-16 rifles
to fight the communist New People’s Army (NPA)"". Police investigator Ireneo
Dalogdog, head of the Tugbok police, said he had been receiving reports that
Diarog was being harassed by armed men associated with Quiboloy. Diarog’s
farmhouse had earlier been burned down thrice.
