Biblical literalism Biblical literalism (also called Biblicism or Biblical
fundamentalism) is the interpretation or translation of the explicit and
primary sense of words in the Bible. A literal Biblical interpretation is
associated with the fundamentalist and evangelical hermeneutical approach to
scripture—the historical-grammatical method—and is used extensively by
conservative Christians, in contrast to the historical-critical method of
liberal Christians. The essence of this approach focuses upon the author's
intent as the primary meaning of the text. Literal interpretation does place
emphasis upon the referential aspect of the words or terms in the text. It does
not, however, mean a complete denial of literary aspects, genre, or figures of
speech within the text (e.g., parable, allegory, simile, or metaphor). Also
literalism does not necessarily lead to total and complete agreement upon one
single interpretation for any given passage. There are two kinds of literal
interpretation, letterism and the more common historical-grammatical method.
Letterism attempts to uncover the meaning of the text through a strict emphasis
upon a mechanical, wooden literalism of words. This approach often obscures the
literary aspects and consequently the primary meaning of the text. The
historical grammatical method is a hermeneutic technique that strives to
uncover the meaning of the text by taking into account not just the grammatical
words, but also the syntactical aspects, the cultural and historical
background, and the literary genre. Fundamentalists and evangelicals sometimes
refer to themselves as "literalists" or Biblical literalists. Sociologists also
use the term in reference to conservative Christian beliefs which include not
just literalism but also inerrancy. Often the term "Biblical literalism" is
used as a pejorative to describe or ridicule the interpretative approaches of
fundamentalist or evangelical Christians. A 2011 Gallup survey reports, "Three
in 10 Americans interpret the Bible literally, saying it is the actual word of
God. That is similar to what Gallup has measured over the last two decades, but
down from the 1970s and 1980s. A 49% plurality of Americans say the Bible is
the inspired word of God but that it should not be taken literally,
consistently the most common view in Gallup's nearly 40-year history of this
question. Another 17% consider the Bible an ancient book of stories recorded by
man." Clarity of scripture. The vast majority of evangelical and fundamentalist
Christians hold that scripture is clear, that the basic meaning and teachings
of scripture may be understood by the average person. It refers to the product
(teachings of scripture) rather than the process of interpretation itself
(exegesis). Martin Luther distinguished between external and internal aspects
within the clarity of scripture. External clarity concerns the principles of
hermeneutics (including grammatical aspects) and guidance into understanding
through the process of interpretation. The internal clarity concerns
illumination of the believer—that is, guidance into understanding by the Holy
Spirit. So clarity of scripture does not mean that no interpretation principles
are necessary, or that there is no cultural gap between scripture and today.
Instead exegesis and interpretation principles are utilized as part of the
process to close the cultural gap in striving to understand. What the clarity
of scripture does deny is that the Bible is a code to decipher, or that it
cannot be understood apart from complex academic analysis as is typical in the
historical-critical method of interpretation. Biblical literalists believe
that, unless a passage is clearly intended as allegory, poetry, or some other
genre, the Bible should be interpreted as literal statements by the author. Who
may appropriately decide when a passage is allegorical or literal, however, is
not defined. Fundamentalists typically treat as simple history, according to
its plain sense, such passages as the Genesis account of creation, the deluge
and Noah's ark, and the unnaturally long life-spans of the patriarchs given in
genealogies of Genesis, as well as the strict historicity of the narrative
accounts of Ancient Israel, the supernatural interventions of God in history,
and Jesus' miracles. Literalism does not question that parables, metaphors and
allegory exist in the Bible, but rather relies on contextual interpretations
based on the author's intention.
