Christian Coalition of America The Christian Coalition of America (CCA), a 501
(c)(4) organization, is the successor to the original Christian Coalition
created in 1989 by religious broadcaster and former presidential candidate
Marion Gordon "Pat" Robertson, and is a US Christian advocacy group, which
includes Christian fundamentalists, neo-evangelicals and conservative
charismatics. While labeling itself as the Christian Coalition, the
organization represents certain viewpoints among numbers of Christians in the
United States, but Christians with other beliefs disagree with the
organization's ideas. The CCA's values are consistent with those of the
Christian right. Early Years. Formation. Following a well-funded but failed bid
for the U.S. presidency in 1988, religious broadcaster and political
commentator Pat Robertson used the remainder of his campaign resources to jump-
start the creation of a voter mobilization effort dubbed the Christian
Coalition. "Americans for Robertson" accumulated a mailing list of several
million conservative Christians interested in politics. This mailing list
formed the foundation for the new organization. The coalition had four original
directors, including Robertson himself, Robertson's son, Gordon Robertson, Dick
Weinhold, head of the Texas organization, and Billy McCormack, pastor of the
University Worship Center in Shreveport, Louisiana. McCormack had headed the
Louisiana division of "Americans for Robertson" in 1988 and was also the vice
president of the coalition. After its founding, the CCA allowed a grace period
to operate as a 501(c)(4) tax-exempt organization before the IRS made its final
determination. Forty-nine state chapters were also created as independent
corporations within their states, including the Christian Coalition of Texas. A
handful, including the Christian Coalition of Texas, successfully obtained non-
profit status as a 501(c)(4) tax-exempt organization, while the national
group's application remained pending and unresolved. Voter guides. In 1990, the
national Christian Coalition, Inc., headquartered in Chesapeake, Virginia,
began producing non-partisan voter guides which it distributed to conservative
Christian churches. 40Â million guides were distributed in the 1992 and 1996
presidential election years. Complaints that the voter guides were actually
partisan led to the denial of the Christian Coalition, Inc.'s tax-exempt status
in 1999. Later that same year, the Coalition prevailed in its five year defense
of lawsuit brought by the Federal Election Commission. Ralph Reed, a University
of Georgia Ph.D. candidate and hotel waiter whom Robertson had met at an
inaugural dinner for George H. W. Bush in January 1989, took control of day-to-
day operations of the coalition in 1989 as its founding executive director. He
remained in the post until August 1997 when he left to enter partisan political
consulting, founding his new firm Century Strategies, based near Atlanta,
Georgia. Political involvement. Robertson served as the organization's
president from its founding until June 1997, when President Reagan's Cabinet
Secretary Donald P. Hodel was named president of the CCA, and former U. S.
Representative Randy Tate (R-WA) was named executive director. Upon
announcement of Hodel becoming president of the CCA, he expressed a desire to
serve the grassroots activists that made up the Coalition: "...I am here. Not
only because I felt God's call on me but that I knew of God's call on you."
Washington insider and president of Americans for Tax Reform, Grover Norquist,
an old Reed ally, said of the appointments: "What you've got is Reagan and
Gingrich. Hodel is a Reagan Republican and Tate is a Gingrich Republican." The
CCA was ranked by "Fortune" magazine as the 7th most powerful political
organization in America late in 1997. After a disagreement with Robertson,
Hodel left in January 1999 and Tate soon followed. Robertson re-assumed the
presidency, and later turned it and the chairmanship over to the group's
Executive Vice President and former State Chairman of South Carolina, Roberta
Combs, when he officially left the Coalition in late 2001. Recent Years. In
2000, the CCA moved from its long-standing headquarters in Chesapeake,
Virginia, to a large office on Capitol Hill in Washington, D.C.. Roberta Combs,
the current president and CEO, is a founding state director and has been the
only woman on the board of directors for the CCA in the history of the
organization. Since then, Combs installed members of her family as high-ranking
officials in the group, including her daughter Michele Ammons and her son-in-
law Tracy Ammons. Michele Ammons later divorced Tracy Ammons, leading to
Tracy's departure. Combs canceled a direct-mail fund-raising campaign run by
fund-raiser Bill Sidebottom of Interact Response Communications aimed at
fighting child pornography after a U.S. Supreme Court ruling. The cancellation
of the campaign in the middle of its run led to nearly a dozen lawsuits by
creditors and the bankruptcy of its fund-raising company. Without a fund-
raising company supporting it, the Christian Coalition went into sharp decline
financially. In March 2001, the CCA was sued U.S. District Court by its
African-American employees, who alleged racial discrimination by Roberta Combs.
The Washington D.C. District Court issued an injunction against the CCA and the
case was later settled with money paid to the African-American plaintiffs. In
November 2002, Roberta Combs down-sized the staff and moved the organization's
offices from Washington, D.C., to a suburb of Charleston, South Carolina. The
Christian Coalition was later sued for $1,890 by the moving company it used to
transport itself to South Carolina because the Christian Coalition failed to
pay it in full. The Christian Coalition lost in court in Richmond, Virginia,
and finally paid the movers. In addition, the Christian Coalition's longtime
law firm, Huff, Poole & Mahoney PC of Virginia Beach, said it was owed $69,729.
Global Direct, a fundraising firm in Oklahoma, sued for $87,000 in expenses. In
the years since Robertson and Reed left the group, the Coalition's influence
has greatly declined under Combs. The Coalition saw a loss in revenue from a
high of $26.5 million in 1996 to $1.3 million in 2004. The organization's 2004
income tax return, (which for non-profits is made publicly available), showed
the Christian Coalition to be technically bankrupt, with debts exceeding income
and a negative net worth. The once prosperous group now owes more than $2
million in debt and is now under siege by lawsuits from creditors and is also
struggling to hold on to state chapters. In 2005, the Coalition finally
concluded a settlement agreement with the Internal Revenue Service, ending its
long-running battle with that agency regarding its tax exempt status. As a
result, the IRS has now recognized the Coalition as a 501(c)(4) tax-exempt
organization, the first time in the agency's history that it has granted a
letter of exemption to a group that stated in its application that it would
distribute voter guides directly in churches. The consent decree enforces
limitations on the terminology that may be used in the Coalition's voter
guides. In late 2005, the Washington Post reported that the Christian Coalition
was unable to pay its office postage bill to Pitney Bowes, and that the
Christian Coalition had not paid its new lawyers in Virginia Beach and that the
law firm had also sued the Christian Coalition for its legal bills. Attempts to
collect the law firm's fees in Virginia and South Carolina returned no funds of
the Christian Coalition at various banks. In March 2006, the Christian
Coalition of Iowa renamed itself the Iowa Christian Alliance. In splitting from
the national group, the Iowa Christian Alliance cited "the current problems
facing the Christian Coalition of America" in announcing that it had no ties to
the national organization. In August 2006, the Christian Coalition of Alabama
split from the national group. It later renamed itself Christian Action
Alabama. In November 2006, the president-elect of the CCA resigned his post,
citing a difference in philosophy over which issues the conservative Christian
organization should embrace. Rev. Joel C. Hunter, currently the senior pastor
of the Northland Church in Longwood, Florida, was to assume the presidency in
January. But Hunter said the Coalition's leaders resisted his calls to expand
their issue base, saying the organization wouldn't allow him to expand its
agenda beyond opposing abortion and same-sex marriage. Hunter also said he
wanted to focus on rebuilding the Coalition's once powerful grassroots, an
appeal he says board members rejected. "After initial willingness to consider
these changes, the board of the CCA decided, 'that is fine, but that is not who
we are,'" Hunter said. Combs still remains as the Coalition's president.
