Anti-Christian sentiment Anti-Christian sentiment is an opposition to
Christians, the Christian religion, or the practice of Christianity.
Christophobia or Christianophobia are also names for "every form of
discrimination and intolerance against Christians" according to Council of
European Episcopal Conferences (CCEE).. This article treats the subject as
distinct from a general opposition to religion. Anti-Christian expressions.
Vandalism. The vandalism or defacement of Christian symbols or property is one
form of the expression of anti-Christian sentiment. If the defaced or
vandalized object is considered holy by Christians, such as the Bible, the
Cross, or an image of Christ or a saint, the case becomes that of desecration.
Such destruction may also be illegal if it violates property rights or hate
crime laws. Arson directed at Christian meeting places or churches is often
considered a hate crime. However, churches may also be targeted for reasons
unrelated to anti-Christian sentiment, especially racism(against the
congregants). According to the Crown, the burning of a church in Minnedosa,
Manitoba was committed by two fans of National Socialist black metal music with
anti-Christian themes. Vandals stole a wooden statue of Virgin Mary, from the
Saint Albert the Great Parish of Calgary, Canada in August 2008 detached her
hands, tried to incinerate it, and threw into a ditch along the nearby 22x
Highway. In 2010, vandals daubed graffiti and attempted to burn down the White
Church of Baildon, West Yorkshire, marking the church with the sign of the
pentagram and scrawling anti-Christian graffiti upon it. Music. Some fans of
black metal and witch house music declare open hatred of Christianity.
Headliners of the black metal genre have claimed responsibility for inspiring
(if not necessarily perpetrating) over fifty arsons directed at Christian
churches in Norway from 1992 to 1996. The most notable church was Norway's
Fantoft Stave Church, which the police believed was destroyed by the one-man
band Burzum, Varg Vikernes, also known as "Count Grishnackh". Examples of anti-
Christian sentiment in politics and culture. Africa (non-Middle East). Somalia.
In September 2011 militants sworn to eradicate Christianity from Somalia
beheaded two Christian converts. A third Christian convert was beheaded in
Mogadishu in early 2012. Tunisia. A video aired on "Egypt Today" in 2012 showed
the Muslim beheading of a young Tunisian man who adopted the Christian faith
and refused to renounce it. Nigeria. The Boko Haram Islamist group has bombed
churches and killed numerous Christians who they regard as kafirs (infidels).
Zanzibar. In Muslim majority Zanzibar, there have been numerous attacks on
churches. A bishop condemned the lack of action by the government. Mali. The
Islamist group Ansar Dine has led to Christians fleeing their cities to avoid
being put under sharia law. Senegal. During government protests, some crowds
turned their violence against Christian churches. Some of the infrastructure
was destroyed. Sudan. The Foreign Missionary Society Act of 1962 put a limit on
the number of churches constructed. In 1992 there were mass arrests and torture
of local priests. Students in military training were forbidden from praying
unlike Muslims. Prior to partition, southern Sudan which had a number of
Christian villages; these were subsequently wiped out by Janjaweed militias.
Americas (The). Chile. Some examples of Christofobia are the following: The
killing of the priest Faustino Gazziero in 2004 ., the publication of
caricatures of Christ, the burning of the image of Our Lady of Mount Carmel
(national Patroness), and the subsequent mock of the faithful's grief in a
nation wide newspaper. Europe. Germany. According to a 2012 survey, 46% of the
Turks in Germany wish that one day more Muslims live in Germany than
Christians. 8% think of Christians as inferior human beings. Norway. On 6 June
1992, the Fantoft Stave Church, a wooden structure originally built in 1150 in
Fortun, when the Vikings converted to Christianity, and moved to Bergen in
1883, was burnt down. At first the fire was attributed to lightning and
electrical failure. In January 1993 Varg Vikernes, also known as "Count
Grishnackh", was interviewed by a local journalist in his apartment decorated
with 'Nazi paraphernalia, weapons and Satanic symbols'. According to Vikernes,
black metal fans had declared war on Christianity and Norwegian society and was
responsible for eight church burnings as part of an ongoing terror campaign. He
used a photo of the charred remnants of the church taken soon after the fire on
his band Burzum's album entitled Aske (Norwegian for ashes). Following his
statement the Norwegian authorities began to clamp down on black metal
fanatics. In 1994 Vikernes was found guilty of murder, arson and possession of
illegal weapons (including explosives) and given the maximum sentence under
Norwegian law of 21 years in prison. He was released in 2009. Sweden. On 7
February 1993, the Lundby New Church in Gothenburg, Sweden was burnt down.
United Kingdom. Mark Pritchard, the Member of Parliament representing the
English constituency of The Wrekin, instigated a debate in the House of Commons
on 5 December 2007 on the issue of Anti-Christian sentiment, describing the
phenomenon as 'Christianophobia'. Introducing the debate, he said it was about
"how anti-Christian sentiment is increasing, not decreasing; why many
Christians feel they are not getting a fair hearing when it comes to
Christianity in the public square; and what many people of all faiths and no
faith see as the increasing marginalisation of Britain’s Christian history,
heritage and traditions through the actions of Whitehall Departments,
Government agencies, local authorities, the charity commissioners, or other
sectors of society." One example where anti-Christian sentiment was evident was
when a church building was wrecked by squatters which included the adding of
anti-Christian graffiti to the walls. Middle East. Fiorello Provera of the
European Parliament called the Middle East "the most dangerous place for
Christians to live" and cited Ayaan Hirsi Ali, who blamed the international
community for failing to deal with what she considers a war against Christians
in the Muslim world. Former Lebanese president Amine Gemayel stated in 2011
that Christians had become the target of genocide after dozens of Christians
were killed in deadly attacks in Egypt and Iraq. According Israeli ambassador
to the United States Michael Oren, in the hundred years leading up to 2010 the
Middle East's Christian population dwindled from 20% to less than 5%. Oren
argues that with the exception of Israel, where Christian communities have been
flourishing since the state's founding in 1948, Christians in the Middle East
have endured severe political and cultural hardships: in Egypt, Muslim
extremists have subjected Coptic Christians to beatings and massacres,
resulting in the exodus of 200,000 Copts from their homes; in Iraq, 1,000
Christians were killed in Baghdad between the years 2003 and 2012 and 70
churches in the country were burned; in Iran, converts to Christianity face the
death penalty and in 2012 Pastor Yousef Nadarkhani was sentenced to death; in
Saudi Arabia, private Christian prayer is against the law; in the Gaza Strip,
half of the Palestinian Christian population has fled since Hamas seized power
in 2007 and Gazan law forbids public displays of crucifixes; in the West Bank,
the Christian population has been reduced from 15% to less than 2%. Egypt. In
Egypt, the government does not recognize religious conversions involving Muslim
who choose to embrace the Christian faith. Since the overthrow of Hosni Mubarak
in 2011, Egypt's Coptic Christians have been the target of growing
discrimination. In 2011, Egypt's Coptic Christians experienced church burnings,
protests against the appointment of a Coptic governor in Qena, and deadly
confrontations with the Egyptian army. On television Islamists referred to
Christians as heretics and said they should be made to pay the jizya tax. A
Coptic priest accused Islamists in the country of massacring innocent pigs
predominantly owned by Copts during a swine flu scare: "They killed these
innocent pigs just because they thought they violated their religion in some
way." In October 2011 a draft resolution passed by the European Parliament
accused Egypt of persecuting the country's Christian population. By mid-2012
10,000 Christians had fled the country. Iraq. The consolidation of power in the
hands of Shiite Islamists in Iraq since the overthrow of the Saddam Hussein
regime has been to the detriment of Iraq's Christian communities. Friction
between rival sects in Iraq has frequently resulted in violence being directed
against Christians in the country. Consequently, there has been a flight of
Christians from some areas to Europe and to the United States. Since 2003,
hundreds of thousand of Christians have fled Iraq, such that the Christian
population, which may have been as high as 1.4 million prior to the Iraq War,
has dropped to 500,000, with numbers continuing to decline. Between 2003 and
2012 more than 70 churches were bombed. In 2007 Al Qaeda militants killed a
young priest in Mosul, and in 2010 terrorists massacred 53 Assyrian Christians
in a Baghdad church. Israel. In Jerusalem, there have been instances of
Christian churches being vandalized with spray-painted offensive remarks
against Christianity including death threats. These are believed to be price
tag attacks by extremist settlers. In a 2008 Tel Aviv incident, hundreds of
copies of the New Testament, which had been handed out in the city (allegedly
by Messianic Jews), were burned by three teenaged Orthodox students of Judaism.
Uzi Aharon, the town’s deputy mayor, told CNN he had collected the New
Testaments but that he did not plan for them to be burned. The youths had done
so while he was not present. Once he found out that the fire was going, he put
it out. A number of Ultra-Orthodox/Haredi youth have reportedly spat at
Christian clergymen. Archbishop Aris Shirvanian, of Jerusalem's Armenian
Patriarchate, says he personally has been spit at about 50 times in the past 12
years. The Anti-Defamation League has called on the chief Rabbis to speak out
against the interfaith assaults. Father Goosan, Chief Dragoman of the Armenian
Patriarchate of Jerusalem, stated that, "I know there are fanatical Haredi
groups that don't represent the general public but it's still enraging. It all
begins with education. It's the responsibility of these men's yeshiva heads to
teach them not to behave this way". In January 2010, Christian leaders, Israeli
Foreign ministry staff, representatives of the Jerusalem municipality and the
Haredi community met to discuss inter-faith tolerance. The Haredi Community
Tribunal of Justice published a statement condemning harassment of Christians,
stating that it was a "desecration of God's name." Several events were planned
in 2010 by the Orthodox Yedidya congregation to show solidarity with Christians
and improve relations between the Haredi and Christian communities of
Jerusalem. In July 2012, a member of the Knesset, Michael Ben-Ari, who supports
Kahanism, videotaped himself tearing up a copy of the New Testament and
throwing it in the trash. Ben-Ari referred to it as a "despicable book" that
should be "in the dustbin of history". In response, the American Jewish
Committee urged the Knesset to censure Ben-Ari, while a spokesman for Benjamin
Netanyahu also condemned Ben-Ari's actions. Palestinian territories. According
to the organization Palestinian Media Watch (PMW), state-controlled Palestinian
media frequently demonize religions like Judaism and Christianity. PMW
translated into English a children's television program aired twice in 2012 it
said featured a young girl saying Jews and Christians are "cowardly and
despised." West Bank. In 2002 a mob of Palestinian Muslims burned Christian
property in Ramallah. A dossier submitted in 2005 to Church leaders in
Jerusalem listed 93 incidents of abuse alleged to have been committed against
Palestinian Christians by Muslim extremists and 140 cases of gangs allegedly
stealing Christian land in the West Bank. In May 2012 a group of 100 Muslims
attacked Taybeh, a Christian village in the West Bank. Gaza. In 2007 the Gaza
Strip had a tiny Christian minority of 2,500–3,000. The Hamas overthrow of
the Palestinian Authority in Gaza during that year was accompanied by violent
attacks against Christians and Christian holy sites by Islamic militants. A
Catholic convent and Rosary Sisters school were ransacked, with some Christians
blaming Hamas for the attack. In September 2007 Christian anxiety grew after an
80-year-old Christian woman was attacked in her Gaza home by a masked man who
robbed her and called her an infidel. That attack was followed less than a
month later by a deadly assault on the owner of the only Christian bookstore in
Gaza City. Muslim extremists were implicated as being behind the incident. The
library of the Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA) was bombed in 2008 by
gunmen who, according to guards at the site, asked why the guards worked for
"infidels." In 2011 the Christian population of Gaza Strip was less than 1,400.
A member of the Catholic faith told "The Guardian" he was stopped by a Hamas
official and told to remove a wooden crucifix he was wearing. Saudi Arabia. The
human rights advocacy group International Christian Concern (ICC) told the
"Christian Post" that 35 Christian Ethiopians – men and women – were
violently arrested in Jeddah in December 2011 while holding a prayer meeting in
their home. The prisoners complained of being persecuted on account of their
faith and of being pressured to convert to Islam, and the women reported
undergoing a humiliating strip search. According to the ICC, one prisoner said,
"The Muslim preacher was sent by officials to speak to the prisoners vilified
Christianity, denigrated the Bible and told us that Islam is the only true
religion." Syria. In October 2011 a draft resolution passed by the European
Parliament accused rebel groups of persecuting the Syrian Christian population.
In March 2012 reports circulated indicating that Christians were expelled from
parts of Homs by an anti-Assad militant group with ties to al-Qaeda. In June a
report in Agenzia Fides indicated that most of Qusair's Christian inhabitants
had abandoned the town in the wake of an ultimatum from a local rebel leader.
