Conservative Judaism Conservative Judaism (also known as Masorti Judaism
outside of the United States and Canada) is a modern stream of Judaism that
arose out of intellectual currents in Germany in the mid-19th century and took
institutional form in the United States in the early 1900s. Conservative
Judaism has its roots in the school of thought known as Positive-Historical
Judaism, developed in 1850s Germany as a reaction to the more liberal religious
positions taken by Reform Judaism. The term "conservative" was meant to signify
that Jews should attempt to "conserve" Jewish tradition, rather than reform or
abandon it, and does not imply the movement's adherents are politically
conservative. Because of this potential for confusion, a number of Conservative
Rabbis have proposed renaming the movement, and outside of the United States
and Canada, in many countries including Israel and the UK, it is today known as
"Masorti" Judaism (Hebrew for "Traditional"). In the United States and Canada,
the term "Conservative", as applied, does not always indicate that a
congregation is affliliated with the United Synagogue of Conservative Judaism,
the movement's central institution and the one to which the term, without
qualifier, usually refers. Rather, it is sometimes employed by unaffiliated
groups to indicate a range of beliefs and practices more liberal than is
affirmed by the Orthodox, and more traditional than the more liberal Jewish
denominations (Reform and Reconstructionist Judaism). In Canada, several
congregations belong to the Canadian Council of Conservative Synagogues instead
of the United Synagogue. The moniker Conservadox is sometimes employed to refer
to the right wing of the Conservative spectrum, although "Traditional" is used
as well (as in the Union for Traditional Judaism). Organizational structure.
The international association of Conservative/Masorti Rabbis is known as the
Rabbinical Assembly; the Cantors Assembly is the organization of chazanim. The
global youth movement is known as NOAM (an acronym for No'ar Masorti); its
North American chapter is called the United Synagogue Youth. The movement
maintains numerous Rabbinical seminaries and other educational institutions.
History. Like Reform Judaism, the Conservative movement developed in Europe and
the United States in the 19th century, as Jews reacted to the changes brought
about by the Enlightenment and Jewish emancipation, a confluence of events that
lead to Haskalah, or the Jewish Enlightenment. In Europe the movement was known
as Positive-Historical Judaism, and it is still known as "the historical
school." Historical antecedents. Positive-Historical Judaism, the intellectual
forerunner to Conservative Judaism, was developed as a school of thought in the
1840s and 1850s in Germany. Its principal founder was Rabbi Zecharias Frankel,
who had broken with the German Reform Judaism in 1845 over its rejection of the
primacy of the Hebrew language in Jewish prayer and the rejection of the laws
of kashrut. In 1854, Frankel became the head of the Jewish Theological Seminary
of Breslau (then in Prussia, now Wrocław, Poland). At the seminary, Frankel
taught that Jewish law was not static, but rather has always developed in
response to changing conditions. He called his approach towards Judaism
"Positive-Historical," which meant that one should have a positive attitude
towards accepting Jewish law and tradition as normative, yet one should be open
to developing the law in the same fashion that it has always historically
developed. Frankel rejected the innovations of Reform Judaism as insufficiently
based in Jewish history and communal practice. However, Frankel's use of modern
methods of historical scholarship in analyzing Jewish texts and developing
Jewish law set him apart from neo-Orthodox Judaism, which was concurrently
developing under the leadership of Rabbi Samson Raphael Hirsch. United States.
The differences between the more modern and traditional branches of American
Judaism came to a head in 1883, at the "Trefa Banquet" at the Highland House
entertainment pavilion, which was at the top of the Mount Adams Incline –
where shellfish and other non-kosher dishes were served at the celebration of
the first graduating class of Hebrew Union College in Cincinnati. The adoption
of the radical Pittsburgh Platform in 1885, which dismissed observance of the
ritual commandments and Jewish peoplehood as "anachronistic", created a
permanent wedge between the Reform movement and more traditional American Jews.
In 1886, prominent Sephardic Rabbis Sabato Morais and H. Pereira Mendes founded
the Jewish Theological Seminary (JTS) in New York City as a more traditional
alternative to Hebrew Union College. The Seminary's brief affiliation with the
traditional congregations that established the Union of Orthodox Congregations
in 1898 was severed due to the Orthodox rejection of the Seminary's academic
approach to Jewish learning. Around the start of the 20th century, the Seminary
lacked a source of permanent funding and was ordaining on average no more than
one Rabbi per year. This situation was resolved due to the efforts of Cyrus
Adler, professor of Semitic languages at Johns Hopkins University and founder
of the Jewish Publication Society, who convinced a number of wealthy German
Reform Jews including Jacob Schiff, David and Simon Guggenheim, Mayer
Sulzberger, and Louis Marshall, to contribute $500,000 to the faltering JTS.
The fortunes of Conservative Judaism underwent a dramatic turnaround when in
1902, the famed scholar Solomon Schechter, lecturer in Talmud at the University
of Cambridge, accepted the invitation to become president of JTS. Under
Schechter's leadership, JTS attracted a distinguished faculty, including Louis
Ginzberg (author of "Legends of the Jews"), historian Alexander Marx, Arabist
Israel Friedlander, and future founder of Reconstructionism Mordecai Kaplan,
and became a highly regarded center of Jewish learning. In 1913, the
Conservative Movement founded its congregational arm, the United Synagogue of
America, which would later become the United Synagogue of Conservative Judaism.
Conservative Judaism enjoyed rapid growth in the first half of the 20th
century, becoming the largest American Jewish denomination. Its combination of
modern innovation (such as mixed gender seating) and traditional practice
particularly appealed to first and second-generation Eastern European Jewish
immigrants, who found Orthodoxy too restrictive, but Reform Judaism foreign.
After World War II, Conservative Judaism continued to thrive. The 1950s and
early 1960s featured a boom in synagogue construction as upwardly mobile
American Jews moved to the suburbs. Conservative Judaism occupied an enviable
middle position during a period where American society prized consensus. By the
1990s Conservative Judaism continued to flourish, yet dichotomies of practice
and belief, which had been present for years, began to formulate. After a
substantial gift from Los Angeles philanthropist Ruth Ziegler, a new rabbinical
school was formed at the American Jewish University "(then University of
Judaism)" in Bel Air, California. Established in 1996, the Ziegler School of
Rabbinic Studies became the first independent Jewish seminary to be established
on the west coast. In 2001, all graduates of the Ziegler School were formally
admitted as members of the Rabbinical Assembly. Working with this 1990s trend
of diversity and institutional growth, Conservative Judaism remained the
largest denomination in America, with 43 percent of Jewish households
affiliated with a synagogue belonging to Conservative synagogues (compared to
35 percent for Reform and 16 percent for Orthodox). In 2000, the NJPS showed
that only 33 percent of synagogue-affiliated American Jews belonged to a
Conservative synagogue. For the first time in nearly a century, Conservative
Judaism is no longer the largest denomination in America. At the same time,
however, certain Conservative institutions, particularly day schools, have
shown significant growth. Conservative leaders agreed that these contrasting
trends indicated that the movement has reached a crossroads as it headed into
the 21st century. Schisms. The first split in the Conservative coalition
occurred in 1963, when followers of Mordecai Kaplan seceded from the movement
to form a distinct Reconstructionist Judaism. Kaplan had been a leading figure
at JTS for 54 years, and had pressed for liturgical reform and innovations in
ritual practice from inside of the framework of Conservative Judaism.
Frustrated by the perceived dominance of the more traditionalist voices at JTS,
Kaplan's followers decided that the ideas of Reconstructionism would be better
served through the creation of a separate denomination. In 1968, the split
became formalized with the establishment of the Reconstructionist Rabbinical
College. Another schism in the Conservative ranks, this time from the
movement's right wing, would come when a number of the traditionalist Rabbis
led by JTS Talmudics professor David Weiss Halivni split from the United
Synagogue to form the Union for Traditional Judaism. The dissenters were
discontented with the general leftward trend in USCJ policies over the previous
decades, such as "prayer book revision, egalitarianism, redefining halakhic
boundaries of sexual relationships, and advocacy of Israel accepting
conversions that are non-halakhic even by Conservative standards"., and the
Union suggests that "The Conservative Movement thus appears to endorse the
notion that changing societal norms can supersede the proper application of
halakhic sources". The Union today describes itself as "trans-denominational"
and maintains a Rabbinical seminary, the Institute of Traditional Judaism.
United Kingdom. The Masorti movement did not establish a presence in the United
Kingdom until much later and came about largely because of a series of
incidents known colletively as the "Jacobs affair": Rabbi Louis Jacobs, a
leading scholar of Anglo Jewry, joined the faculty of the Jews College, leaving
his post as Rabbi of the New West End Synagogue, under the impression that he
would eventually be made principal. However, in 1962 the London Beth Din and
the Chief Rabbi Israel Brodie, who formed the leadership of the United
Synagogue, the UK's Orthodox establishment, refused to allow his appointment on
grounds of heresy because in his 1957 book "We Have Reason to Believe", Jacobs
had rejected the conception of a literal, verbal revelation of the Torah. In
1964, when the committee of the New West End Synagogue wanted to reappoint
Jacobs as their rabbi, Brodie again vetoed his appointment on the same grounds.
In response, Jacobs and many of the New West End congregants established the
New London Synagogue, which became the center of Masorti Judaism in the United
Kingdom. In the United Kingdom, congregational observance is somewhat more
traditional than in the United States. There are no female Rabbis among the
British Masorti, for example, and some Masorti congegations maintain non-
egalitarian practices with regard to gender, such as the mechitza and the
prohibition of women reading from the Torah, while nearly all American
congregations are fully egalitarian and the American Rabbinical schools ordain
women as Rabbis. There are now 13 Masorti congregations in the United Kingdom.
Most Masorti Rabbis are trained at Leo Baeck College, an inter-denominational
seminary that ordains non-Orthodox British Rabbis. Israel. The first Masorti
communities in the State of Israel were founded in 1979 by North American olim.
The movement now has some 50 congregations in Israel, with a membership of
approximately 20,000, and its programs reach some 125,000 each year. In
addition to its kehillot and chavurot maintains a kibbutz (Kibbutz Hanaton), a
moshav (Moshav Shorashim), and IDF Garinim, Masorti groups within the Israeli
Defense Forces. The organization is active in integrating olim from South
America and the former Soviet Union into Israeli society--native Israelis and
olim from non-English speaking countries now make up about 60% of the Israeli
Masorti population, the remaining 40% are North American olim. The movement is
supported by the Masorti Foundation for Conservative Judaism in Israel, an
American organization that provides funding to Masorti programs, which are
disadvantaged by the Israeli government's practice of funding only Orthodox
institutions. Beliefs. God. Conservative Judaism affirms monotheism. Its
members have varied beliefs about the nature of God, and no one understanding
of God is mandated. Beliefs about God in the tradition of Jewish rationalism
have been described as "reemergent" within the movement. Such rationalism often
affirms Maimonidean views of God. Other views of God affirmed by members of the
Conservative movement include Kabbalistic mysticism; Hasidic panentheism (neo-
Hasidism, Jewish Renewal); limited theism (as in Harold Kushner's "When Bad
Things Happen to Good People"); and organic thinking in the fashion of Alfred
North Whitehead and Charles Hartshorne, also known as process theology (such as
Rabbis Max Kaddushin, William E. Kaufman, or Bradley Shavit Artson). Mordecai
Kaplan's religious naturalism (Reconstructionist Judaism) used to have an
influential place in the movement, but since Reconstructionism developed as an
independent movement, this influence has waned. Papers from a recent Rabbinical
Assembly conference on theology were printed in a special issue of the journal
"Conservative Judaism" (Winter 1999); the editors note that Kaplan's naturalism
seems to have dropped from the movement's radar screen. Revelation.
Conservative Jews hold a wide array of views on the subject of revelation. Many
Conservative Jews reject the traditional Jewish idea that God literally
dictated the words of the Torah to Moses at Mount Sinai in a verbal revelation,
but they hold the traditional Jewish belief that God inspired the later
prophets to write the rest of the Tanakh. Many Conservative Jews believe that
Moses was inspired by God in the same manner as the later prophets.
Conservative Jews who reject the concept of verbal revelation believe that God
revealed his will to Moses and other prophets in a non-verbal form — that is,
God's revelation did not include the particular words of the divine texts.
Conservative Judaism is comfortable with higher criticism, including the
documentary hypothesis, the theory that the Torah was redacted from several
earlier sources. The movement's rabbinic authorities and its official Torah
commentary ("Etz Hayim: Torah and Commentary") affirm that Jews should make use
of modern critical literary and historical analysis to understand how the Bible
developed. Concerning the degree of revelation of Torah, Conservative Judaism
rejects the Orthodox position of a direct verbal revelation of the Torah.
However, Conservative Judaism also rejects the Reform view, that the Torah was
not revealed but divinely inspired. In contrast to both, most Conservative
positions affirm the divine but nonverbal revelation of written Torah as the
authentic, historically correct Jewish view. In this view, Oral Torah is
considered inspired by Torah, but not necessarily of a straightforward divine
origin. Jewish law. Conservative Judaism views halakha (Jewish religious law)
as normative and binding. Examining Jewish history and rabbinic literature
through the lens of academic criticism, Conservative Judaism believes that
halakha has always evolved to meet the changing realities of Jewish life, and
that it must continue to do so in the modern age. Some Conservative
theologians, like Seymour Siegel have stressed that the word, "Conservative,"
must be understood in the way it is used in the British political system: that
the laws and traditions have to be "conserved" or preserved, with changes
allowed only when there is an overriding reason—almost always, an overriding
ethical reason—to do so. Siegel believed such change could occur when
halakhah and aggadah, the wealth of non-legalistic rabbinic literature that
included lessons on Jewish morals, values, and ethics, came into conflict. When
they did, he believed that ethics and aggadah should prevail. This view,
together with Conservative Judaism's diversity of opinion concerning divine
revelation, accounts for some of the diversity and disagreement in the
Conservative movement's halakha. When considering changes to halakha,
Conservative Judaism's rabbinical authorities may rely on historical analysis
as well as religious considerations. As Solomon Schechter noted, "however great
the literary value of a code may be, it does not invest it with infallibility,
nor does it exempt it from the student or the Rabbi who makes use of it from
the duty of examining each paragraph on its own merits, and subjecting it to
the same rules of interpretation that were always applied to Tradition".
Concerning interpretation of Halakha (or Jewish law): because of Judaism's
legal tradition, the fundamental differences between modern Jewish
denominations also involve the relevance, interpretation, and application of
Jewish law and tradition. Conservative Judaism believes that its approach is
the most authentic expression of Judaism as it was traditionally practiced.
Conservative Jews believe that movements to its left, such as Reform and
Reconstructionist Judaism, have erred by rejecting the traditional authority of
Jewish law and tradition. They believe that the Orthodox Jewish movements, on
the theological right, have erred by slowing down, or stopping, the historical
development of Jewish law: "Conservative Judaism believes that scholarly study
of Jewish texts indicates that Judaism has constantly been evolving to meet the
needs of the Jewish people in varying circumstances, and that a central
halakhic authority can continue the halakhic evolution today." (Soc. Culture.
Jewish Usenet Newsgroup FAQ) The Conservative movement makes a conscious effort
to use historical sources to determine what kind of changes to Jewish tradition
have occurred, how and why they occurred, and in what historical context. With
this information they believe that they can better understand the proper way
for rabbis to interpret and apply Jewish law to our conditions today. See also
under Modern Orthodox Judaism. Mordecai Waxman, a leading figure in the
Rabbinical Assembly, writes that "Reform has asserted the right of
interpretation but it rejected the authority of legal tradition. Orthodoxy has
clung fast to the principle of authority, but has in our own and recent
generations rejected the right to any but minor interpretations. The
Conservative view is that both are necessary for a living Judaism. Accordingly,
Conservative Judaism holds itself bound by the Jewish legal tradition, but
asserts the right of its rabbinical body, acting as a whole, to interpret and
to apply Jewish law." (Mordecai Waxman "Tradition and Change: The Development
of Conservative Judaism") Conservative Judaism views the process by which
Reform and Reconstructionist Judaism make changes to Jewish tradition as
potentially invalid . Thus, Conservative Judaism rejects patrilineal descent
and would hold that a child of a non-Jewish mother who was raised as a Reform
or Reconstructionist Jew is not legally Jewish and would have to undergo
conversion to become a Jew. The Conservative movement is committed to Jewish
pluralism and respects the religious practices of Reform and Reconstructionist
Jews. For example, the Conservative movement recognizes their clergy as rabbis,
even if it does not necessarily accept their specific decisions. Conservative
Judaism accepts that the Orthodox approach to halakhah is generally valid.
Accordingly, a Conservative Jew could usually satisfy their halakhic
obligations by participation in Orthodox rituals. Occasionally, however, they
may come into conflict. For instance, if two men and a woman were to eat a meal
together, a Conservative Jew would believe that the presence of three adult
Jews would obligate the group to say a communal form of the Grace After Meals,
while an Orthodox Jew would believe that, lacking three adult Jewish "males",
the group would not be able to do such. Thus, though often "de facto" the case,
Conservative Judaism's halakhic system does not "inherently" see Orthodox
halakhic practice as acceptable and legitimate halakhic practice for a
Conservative Jew. Gender equality. In the 1970s and early 1980s, Conservative
Judaism was divided over issues of gender equality. In 1973, the Committee on
Jewish Law and Standards voted, without adopting an explanatory responsum, to
permit synagogues to count women toward a minyan, but left the choice to
individual congregations. After a further decade of debate, in 1983, JTS voted
to admit women for ordination as Conservative rabbis, also without adopting an
explanatory responsum. Some opponents of these decisions left the Conservative
movement to form the Union for Traditional Judaism. In 2002, the Committee
adopted a responsum that provides an official religious-law foundation for its
past actions and articulates the current Conservative approach to the role of
women in Judaism. In December 2006, a responsum was adopted by the Committee
that approved the ordination of gay and lesbian rabbis and permitted commitment
ceremonies for lesbian and gay Jews (but not same-sex marriage), while
maintaining the traditional prohibition against anal sex between men. An
opposing responsum, that maintained the traditional prohibitions against
ordinations and commitment ceremonies, was also approved. Both responsa were
enacted as majority opinions, with some members of the Committee voting for
both. This result gives individual synagogues, rabbis, and rabbinical schools
discretion to adopt either approach. Individual rabbis continue to be free to
avail themselves of more traditionalist minority rulings, and some
congregations, particularly in Canada, accordingly still retain a more limited
ritual role for women. On May 31, 2012, a responsum was passed permitting same-
sex marriage. Educational institutions. Advanced Jewish Learning. A
Conservative movement-affiliated institution that does not grant rabbinic
ordination but which runs along the lines of a traditional yeshiva is the
Conservative Yeshiva, located in Jerusalem. Conservative rabbis also play a
leading role at a number of non-denominational institutions of advanced Jewish
learning. The rosh yeshivas at Yeshivat Hadar in New York, New York include
rabbis Elie Kaunfer and Shai Held who were ordained by the Conservative
movement (at Jewish Theological Seminary). The Rosh Yeshiva at the Canadian
Yeshiva & Rabbinical School in Toronto is a Conservative rabbi, Roy Tanenbaum.
The rabbinical school of the Academy for Jewish Religion in California is led
by Conservative rabbi Mel Gottlieb. The faculties of the Academy for Jewish
Religion in New York and of the Rabbinical School of Hebrew College in Newton
Centre, Massachusetts also includes a large number of Conservative rabbis. Many
smaller programs, such as Rabbi Benay Lappe's SVARA yeshiva, are also led by
Conservative rabbis. Day schools. The United Synagogue of Conservative Judaism
maintains the Solomon Schecter Day Schools, comprising 76 day schools in 19
American states and two Canadian provinces serving Jewish children. Many other
"community day schools" that are not affiliated with the Solomon Schechter
network take a generally Conservative approach, but unlike the Schechter
schools, these schools generally have "no barriers to enrollment based on the
faith of the parents or on religious practices in the home." During the first
decade of the 21st century, a number of schools that were part of the Schechter
network transformed themselves into non-affiliated community day schools.
Criticism. Orthodox Jewish leaders vary considerably in their dealings with the
Conservative movement and with individual Conservative Jews. Some Modern
Orthodox leaders cooperate and work with the Conservative movement, while
"haredi" ("Ultra-Orthodox") Jews often eschew formal contact with Conservative
Judaism, or at least its rabbinate. From the Orthodox perspective, Conservative
Jews are considered just as Jewish as Orthodox Jews, but they are viewed as
misguided, consistent violators of halakha. Over the years, Conservative
Judaism has experienced internal criticism. Due to halakhic disputes, such as
the controversies over the role of women and homosexuality, some Conservative
Talmudic scholars and experts in halakha have left the Jewish Theological
Seminary and the Committee on Jewish Law and Standards. and the seminary's
former Chancellor, Rabbi Ismar Schorsch, complained of the movement's "erosion
of fidelity to Halacha ... [which brings close to Reform Judaism." In matters
of marriage and divorce, the State of Israel relies on its Chief Rabbinate to
determine who is Jewish; the Chief Rabbinate, following Orthodox practice, does
not recognize the validity of conversions performed by Conservative rabbis and
will require a Jew who was converted by a Conservative rabbi to undergo a
second, Orthodox conversion to be regarded as a Jew for marriage and other
purposes.
