Criticism of Conservative Judaism Criticism of Conservative Judaism is
widespread in the Orthodox Jewish community, although the movement also has its
critics in Reform Judaism and in other streams of Judaism. While the
Conservative movement professes fidelity to Jewish tradition, it considers
"Halakha" (Jewish religious law) to be a dynamic process that needs
reinterpreting in modern times. The criticism by Orthodox Jews and
traditionalists within the movement itself revolves around the following:
Critics also claim that the legal analysis of the Conservative movement tends
to be ideologically-driven, resulting in intended outcomes to such an extent
that it is outside the bounds of traditional halakhic analysis. Criticism from
Orthodoxy. From Haredi Judaism perspective, criticism is exemplified by Rabbi
Avi Shafran of Agudath Israel of America. Shafran wrote in 2001 that the
Conservative movement's leaders "trample" halakha while proclaiming fealty to
it. He argued that the movement was a failure because nearly three-quarters of
Conservative Jews said that they consider a Jew to be anyone raised Jewish,
even if his or her mother was a gentile—the official Reform position,
rejected by Conservative leaders as nonhalachic. Shafran further argued that
Conservative Judaism "movement is not honest" because, though stating its
commitment to halakhah (Jewish law), it approved the ordination of women based
on a commission containing mostly laypeople and only one Talmud scholar.
Shafran stated that the movement should have relied on the Talmud faculty of
JTS. Similarly, in 2006, Rabbi Shafran criticized the decision by the
Conservative movement's Committee on Jewish Law and Standards to adopt a
responsum liberalizing its position on homosexual conduct. Shafran repeated his
assertion that the Conservative movement, despite its "claim of halachic
integrity", did not follow the "true halachic process". Criticism from
Conservative traditionalists. At the 2006 convention of the Rabbinical
Assembly, the Conservative movement's official rabbinical organization, Rabbi
Ismar Schorsch said that the Conservative movement had "lost faith in itself"
and "become Reform." In an interview, Rabbi Schorsch, who was about to retire
as Chancellor of the Jewish Theological Seminary, criticized rabbis and
activists who were lobbying to change the Conservative movement's opposition to
same-sex unions and the ordination of gay clergy. He described their methods as
using scholarship to overturn halakha rather than to foster appreciation of it.
Rabbi David Golinkin, the chair of the Masorti movement's "Va'ad Halakha"
(Israel's counterpart to the Committee on Jewish Law and Standards), criticized
the Conservative movement's proposal to liberalize its position on homosexual
conduct. He wrote that such a change would "split the Conservative movement in
two ... drive away the most halakhically observant laypeople in our synagogues,
and ... have a devastating effect on the Conservative movement throughout the
world.” According to Rabbi Golinkin, if the Conservative movement adopted
such a change, most Israelis would see little difference between the Masorti
movement (Israeli Conservative Judaism in Israel) and Reform Judaism. After the
Committee on Jewish Law and Standards adopted the responsum liberalizing its
position on homosexual conduct, Rabbi Prouser and three other members of the
Committee—Rabbis Joel Roth, Mayer Rabinowitz, and Leonard Levy—resigned in
protest. Criticism from Reform Jews. Rabbi Menitoff's essay drew criticism from
Conservative rabbis, two of whom described his prediction as "off base" and
"wishful thinking." Rabbi Ismar Schorsch, then Chancellor of the Jewish
Theological Seminary, pointed out that “at the beginning of the 20th century,
all the Jewish pundits predicted the demise of Orthodoxy, and they all proved
dead wrong. So Rabbi Menitoff has good company in bad predictions.” Criticism
from third-wave feminists. Some third-wave feminists have criticized
Conservative Judaism's efforts at integrating women as half-hearted attempts at
egalitarianism. Instead of maintaining a traditional approach to worship and
treating women as if they were men, what Dr. Rachel Adler calls "honorary men",
some have suggested that the Conservative movement cannot become truly
egalitarian until it reinterprets Judaism to reflect the perspectives and
experiences of women.
