Diamond Way Buddhism Diamond Way Buddhism ("Diamond Way Buddhism - Karma Kagyu
Lineage") is a lay organization within the Karma Kagyu school of Tibetan
Buddhism. The first Diamond Way Buddhist centre was founded in 1972 by Hannah
and Ole Nydahl. It is led by Ole Nydahl under the spiritual guidance of Trinley
Thaye Dorje, one of two claimants to the title of the 17th Karmapa ("See
Karmapa Controversy)". There are approximately 650 Diamond Way Buddhist centres
world wide. History and development. Following the Chinese invasion of Tibet in
1950, and the subsequent self-exile of the Dalai Lama to India in 1959,
thousands of Tibetans fled Chinese-occupied Tibet as refugees, creating the
Tibetan diaspora. The head of Karma Kagyu school, Rangjung Rigpe Dorje, the
16th Karmapa, also left Tibet in 1959 and established Rumtek monastery in
Sikkim, India as his main seat in exile. The exodus of Tibetans ultimately made
Tibetan Buddhism more accessible to the rest of the world. Many young
Westerners on the hippie trail from Europe to India and Nepal came in contact
with the Tibetans and some became interested in their religion. Among these
first Westerners to come into contact with the Tibetans in exile were Hannah
and Ole Nydahl, who went on their honeymoon to the Himalayas. They first became
students of Lopon Tsechu Rinpoche. In 1969 they met the 16th Karmapa and became
his closest Western students. After meditating and studying Buddhism for three
years, the 16th Karmapa asked Ole and Hannah to start meditation centres in his
name in the West. The first Karma Kagyu center in the West was founded in 1972
in Copenhagen, Denmark. In 1973 the 16th Karmapa visited Europe at the
invitation of Ole and Hannah Nydahl. Following this visit and at the 16th
Karmapa's request, Ole Nydahl began travelling further across Europe in order
to teach the basic doctrines of Karma Kagyu Buddhism. As more became interested
more centers were founded and their number increased over time, particularly in
Germany and Poland. The individual groups grew steadily. He later travelled to
the United States and across South America and Russia, founding more centres.
Following the Karmapa Controversy, Karma Kagyu Buddhist centres were obliged to
decide whether to accept Orgyen Trinley Dorje, who was recognised by Tai Situ,
the Dalai Lama and the Chinese government, or to support Shamar Rinpoche. In
the course of the 1990s, while a majority of Kagyu monasteries elected to
accept Orgyen Trinley Dorje, most Diamond Way centres under Ole Nydahl accepted
Thaye Dorje. Diamond Way Buddhism was founded as a legally distinct
organization within the Karma Kagyu umbrella in 1993. Until then, the Nydahls
had transferred all ownership of the centers they founded to the Karma Kagyu
administration. However, it is common for Karma Kagyu lamas to each have their
own organization for their students, as each teacher has a different style and
approach. For example, Shamarpa has the Bodhipath organization, Chogyam Trungpa
had the Vajradhatu, etc. The goals of the Diamond Way organization remain "the
creation and maintenance of a permanent basis from which to enable both
laypeople and achievers to maintain, cultivate and practice Buddhist religion,
philosophy and culture in countries that are not originally Buddhist, within
the traditional manner of the Diamond Way transmission of the Karma Kagyu
lineage", Buddhist art, supporting translations of authentic Buddhist text, and
funding retreats etc. The "spiritual counsel" of the organisation is provided
by the 17th Karmapa Trinley Thaye Dorje (India), Kunzing Shamar Rinpoche
(India) and Jigme Rinpoche (France). Ideals. Diamond Way describes itself as an
adaptation of the Karma Kagyu tradition to Western culture without Tibetan
customs and organisational structures. Ole Nydahl describes Diamond Way as a
lay tradition offering methods for people who have jobs, partners, families and
responsibilities. He states "...our work is grown on the basis of friendship
and trust... since the Diamond Way teachings aim to bring freedom and
independence, it is people who already have those qualities who are generally
attracted to our centers." He also says he is keen to avoid what were perceived
to be the more exotic or ritualistic aspects of Tibetan Buddhism such as pujas
sung in Tibetan with Tibetan musical accompaniment. In 1998 Ole Nydahl stated
"I simply don’t want gifted and critical people who discover us to step right
into the middle of a puja as has happened so often in the past. They then think
they have landed with Catholics or some other sect and we won’t get a second
chance to benefit them or their like-minded friends." Instead, most meditation
texts (except mantras) are translated and used in European languages.
Practices. The most important practice in Diamond Way Buddhism is considered to
be identification with the teacher and following that to try to sustain the
Mahamudra view and bring what is learned in meditation into daily life. Diamond
Way Buddhism uses a variety of standard Vajrayana meditation methods found
within the Karma Kagyu tradition. When the practitioners meet at lectures or
for meditation they will typically do the "Guru Yoga meditation", (Skt. Guru
yoga, Tib. Lame Naljor) where the practitioner identifies with the enlightened
qualities of the teacher in order to develop these qualities. This is then
followed by the "Invocation of Black Coat", sung in Tibetan. Like other Karma
Kagyu practitioners, individuals then usually do a preliminary practice called
the "ngöndro", consisting of 111,111 repetitions each of 4 different
meditations, as given by the 9th Karmapa. The "ngöndro" must be completed
before practitioners can move on to other practices. In most cases, following
completion of "ngöndro", students practice a meditation on the Eighth Karmapa,
Mikyö Dorje, called "The Guru Yoga in Four Sessions" (Tibetan "Tun Shi Lame
Naljor"). Other practices include a variant of the meditation on "Chenrezig"
(Sanskrit "Avalokiteśvara") composed by the 12th Century "siddha" Tang Tong
Gyalpo and the "phowa" (transference of consciousness at the time of death).
They receive an explanation of the meditations from more experienced members
who are authorized to teach in the Diamond Way Buddhist Centers. Teachers. The
16th Karmapa. The 16th Karmapa Ranjung Rigpe Dorje (1924–1981) was born in
Derge in eastern Tibet. Karmapa left the People's Republic of China in 1959,
deciding that the Dharma would be served better outside Communist China. The
Karmapas were the first incarnations to start the tulku-system and they are the
heads of the Karma Kagyu lineage. He was the Lama who told the Nydahls to start
Karma Kagyu centres in the West and later visited many Karma Kagyu centres,
mainly staying in centres founded by the Nydahls or Kalu Rinpoche. His first
visit in the West was in 1974 and he gave numerous teachings and empowerments
in the centres. The 17th Karmapa. Trinley Thaye Dorje (born 1983) is the
current head of the Karma Kagyu School and one of the candidates to the
reincarnation of the 16th Karmapa. He is considered the true incarnation of the
Karmapa by the Diamond Way Buddhist Centers, as well as by Shamarpa, Shangpa
Rinpoche, Beru Khyentse Rinpoche, Gyatrul Rinpoche and Sherab Gyaltsen
Rinpoche. Trinley Thaye Dorje was born in Tibet but managed to escape in 1994
and was enthroned by Shamarpa at the Karmapa International Buddhist Institute
(KIBI). He has since visited the West several times in order to teach. The
first time he visited Europe was in 2000 and the first time he visited the
United States was in 2003. Ole Nydahl. Ole Nydahl (born 1941 near Copenhagen,
Denmark), is a Buddhist Lama and one of the main figures in the spreading of
Karma Kagyu Buddhism in the West. Since the early 1970s he has toured the
world, giving lectures and meditation courses, and together with his wife
Hannah Nydahl (1946–2007) founded Diamond Way Buddhism. He is often referred
to as Lama Ole Nydahl or Lama Ole. Hannah Nydahl. Hannah Nydahl (1946–2007),
wife of Ole Nydahl, was an important Danish teacher and translator in the Karma
Kagyu lineage of Tibetan Buddhism. She was born and died in Copenhagen,
Denmark. She and Ole Nydahl were introduced to Buddhism on their honeymoon in
Nepal in 1968. They were childhood friends, meeting for the first time when
Hannah was 5 and Ole 10. After a three year period of study they were sent back
to Europe by the 16th Karmapa to found centres in his name. She was a Buddhist
teacher like her husband (sometimes referred to as "Lamini" or "female Lama"),
but the main role of Hannah Nydahl was as a translator for Lamas like the 16th
Karmapa, Lopon Tsechu Rinpoche, Kalu Rinpoche etc. In an interview she
explained, "I do not mind teaching but when I am together with Ole it is more
natural that he teaches. When I am not with him I mainly translate and organize
for the Tibetan lamas." In the magazine "Kagyu Life International" she was
described in this way: "Hannah Nydahl is a much sought after translator and
interpreter of Tibetan Buddhist philosophy. She divides her time between
translating for the lamas at the Karmapa International Buddhist Institute in
New Delhi, India, participating in various Buddhist text translation projects,
organizing schedules and visits of high Rinpoches in the lineage, and traveling
around the world with Lama Ole." She spoke German, English and Tibetan
fluently. As few Tibetan teachers spoke English, she learned Tibetan, from
Tarab Tulku at Copenhagen University. Since all texts were in Tibetan, her work
included translating texts , and spoken translation for the teaching Lamas at
the Karmapa International Buddhist Institute in New Delhi, India, participation
in various Buddhist text translation projects, as well as organizing and
translating lectures for Tibetan Lamas. She was widely respected for her work,
devotion and accomplishments as a Buddhist practitioner. A Danish newspaper
even referred to her as the "Mother of Buddhism". Jørn Borup, Department of
Study of Religion at University of Aarhus said: "The most lasting influence on
the Buddhist practice scene in Denmark was triggered by Ole and Hannah Nydahl
backpacking in the spiritual East during their honeymoon in Nepal in 1968."
Shamarpa. Kunzig Shamar Rinpoche, born 1952 in Derge, Tibet, is second to the
Gyalwa Karmapa in the spiritual hierarchy of the Karma Kagyu School. He fled
Tibet at the age of 9 with the 16th Karmapa. Shamarpa is also known as Red Hat
Karmapa, and is, together with the 17th Karmapa, the current holder of the
Karma Kagyu lineage. Shamarpa completed the Karmapa International Buddhist
Institute (KIBI) in New Delhi, India, after the death of the 16th Karmapa. He
has officially recognized Trinlay Thaye Dorje as the 17th Gyalwa Karmapa.
Shamarpa spends most of his time teaching, travelling around the world. He is
the founder of Bodhi Path, another Karma Kagyu Buddhist group. Lopon Tsechu
Rinpoche. Lopon Tsechu Rinpoche (1918–2003) was the first teacher of Hannah
and Ole Nydahl. He was born in Bhutan, but left the country when he was 13 in
order to study and practice Buddhism in Nepal. He met the 16th Karmapa in 1944
and the Karmapa became his most important teacher. He visited Europe for the
first time in 1987 at the invitation of the Nydahls, who were his first Western
students. He traveled extensively throughout Europe, the Americas, and
Australia giving teachings and initiations. He completed 17 stupas (Buddhist
monuments) in Europe and Asia, including two important stupas in Spain: A
Kalachakra stupa and the Benalmádena Stupa, the biggest stupa outside Asia.
Sherab Gyaltsen Rinpoche. Maniwa Sherab Gyaltsen Rinpoche (born 1950), in
Nepal. He was ordained in Rumtek by the 16th Karmapa. The title "Maniwa" is a
title given to a master of the Chenrezig practice, who have accomplished a
billion "Om mani peme hung" mantras.
