Druze The Druze (, plural دروز, "durūz", are a monotheistic religious
community, found primarily in Syria, Lebanon, Israel, and Jordan, which emerged
during the 11th century from Ismailism school of Shia Islam. Druze beliefs
incorporate several elements from Abrahamic religions, Gnosticism, Neoplatonism
and other philosophies. The Druze call themselves "Ahl al-Tawhid" "the People
of Monotheism" or "al-Muwaḥḥidūn" "the Unitarians". Location. The Druze
people reside primarily in Syria, Lebanon, and Israel. The Institute of Druze
Studies estimates that 40%–50% of Druze live in Syria, 30%–40% in Lebanon,
6%–7% in Israel, and 1%–2% in Jordan. Large communities of expatriate Druze
also live outside the Middle East in Australia, Canada, Europe, Latin America,
the United States, and West Africa. They use the Arabic language and follow a
social pattern very similar to those of the other peoples of the eastern
Mediterranean region. The number of Druze people worldwide exceeds one million,
with the vast majority residing in the Levant or East Mediterranean. History.
Origin of the name. The name Druze is derived from the name of Muhammad bin
Ismail Nashtakin ad-Darazī (from Persian, darzi, "seamster") who was an early
preacher. Although the Druze consider ad-Darazī a heretic the name had been
used to identify them. Before becoming public, the movement was secretive and
held closed meetings in what was known as Sessions of Wisdom. During this stage
a dispute occurred between ad-Darazi and Hamza bin Ali mainly concerning ad-
Darazi's ghuluww (Arabic, "exaggeration"), which refers to the belief that God
was incarnated in human beings, especially 'Ali and his descendants, including
Al-Hakim bi-Amr Allah who was the current Caliph, and ad-Darazi naming himself
"The Sword of the Faith" which led Hamza to write an epistle refuting the need
for the sword to spread the faith and several epistles refuting the beliefs of
the ghulat. In 1016 ad-Darazi and his followers openly proclaimed their beliefs
and called people to join them, causing riots in Cairo against the Unitarian
movement including Hamza bin Ali and his followers which led to the suspension
of the movement for one year and the expulsion of ad-Darazi and his supporters.
Although the Druze religious books describe ad-Darazi as the "insolent one" and
as the "Calf" who is narrow minded and hasty, the name "Druze" is still used
for identification and for historical reasons. In 1018 ad-Darazi was
assassinated for his teachings; some sources claim that he was executed by Al-
Hakim bi-Amr Allah. Some authorities see in the name "Druze" a descriptive
epithet, derived from Arabic dâresah ("those who study"). Others have
speculated that the word comes from the Arabic-Persian word "Darazo" ( "bliss")
or from Shaykh Hussayn ad-Darazī, who was one of the early converts to the
faith. In the early stages of the movement, the word "Druze" is rarely
mentioned by historians, and in Druze religious texts only the word
"Muwaḥḥidūn" ("Unitarian") appears. The only early Arab historian who
mentions the Druze is the 11th century Christian scholar Yahya of Antioch, who
clearly refers to the heretical group created by ad-Darazī rather than the
followers of Hamza ibn 'Alī. As for Western sources, Benjamin of Tudela, the
Jewish traveler who passed through Lebanon in or about 1165, was one of the
first European writers to refer to the Druzes by name. The word "Dogziyin"
("Druzes") occurs in an early Hebrew edition of his travels, but it is clear
that this is a scribal error. Be that as it may, he described the Druze as
"mountain dwellers, monotheists, who believe in 'soul eternity' and
reincarnation." Early history. The Druze faith began as a movement in
Ismailism, that was mainly influenced by Greek philosophy and gnosticism and
opposed certain religious and philosophical ideologies that were present during
that epoch. The faith was preached by Hamza ibn 'Alī ibn Ahmad, a Persian
Ismaili mystic and scholar. He came to Egypt in 1014 and assembled a group of
scholars and leaders from across the world to establish the Unitarian movement.
The order's meetings were held in the Raydan Mosque, near the Al-Hakim Mosque.
In 1017, Hamza officially revealed the Druze faith and began to preach the
Unitarian doctrine. Hamza gained the support of the Fātimid Caliph al-Hakim,
who issued a decree promoting religious freedom prior to the declaration of the
divine call. Al-Hakim became a central figure in the Druze faith even though
his own religious position was disputed among scholars. John Esposito states
that al-Hakim believed that "he was not only the divinely appointed religio-
political leader but also the cosmic intellect linking God with creation",
while others like Nissim Dana and Mordechai Nisan state that he is perceived as
the manifestation and the reincarnation of God or presumably the image of God.
Some Druze and non-Druze scholars like Samy Swayd and Sami Makarem state that
this confusion is due to confusion about the role of the early preacher ad-
Darazi, whose teachings the Druze rejected as heretical. These sources assert
that al-Hakim rejected ad-Darazi's claims of divinity, and ordered the
elimination of his movement while supporting that of Hamza ibn Ali. Al-Hakim
disappeared one night while out on his evening ride – presumably
assassinated, perhaps at the behest of his formidable elder sister Sitt al-
Mulk. The Druze believe he went into Occultation with Hamza ibn Ali and three
other prominent preachers, leaving the care of the "Unitarian missionary
movement" to a new leader, Al-Muqtana Baha'uddin. Closing of the faith. Al-
Hakim was replaced by his underage son, 'Alī az-Zahir. The Unitarian Druze
movement, which existed in the Fatimid Caliphate, acknowledged az-Zahir as the
Caliph, but followed Hamzah as its Imam. The young Caliph's regent, Sitt al-
Mulk, ordered the army to destroy the movement in 1021. At the same time,
Bahā'a ad-Dīn as-Samuki was assigned the leadership of the Unitarian Movement
by Hamza Bin Ali. For the next seven years, the Druze faced extreme persecution
by the new caliph, al-Zahir, who wanted to eradicate the faith. This was the
result of a power struggle inside of the Fatimid empire in which the Druze were
viewed with suspicion because of their refusal to recognize the new Caliph, Ali
az-Zahir, as their Imam. Many spies, mainly the followers of Ad-Darazi, joined
the Unitarian movement in order to infiltrate the Druze community. The spies
set about agitating trouble and soiling the reputation of the Druze. This
resulted in friction with the new caliph who clashed militarily with the Druze
community. The clashes ranged from Antioch to Alexandria, where tens of
thousands of Druze were slaughtered by the Fatimid army. The largest massacre
was at Antioch, where 5,000 Druze religious leaders were killed, followed by
that of Aleppo. As a result, the faith went underground in hope of survival, as
those captured were either forced to renounce their faith or be killed. Druze
survivors "were found principally in southern Lebanon and Syria." In 1038, two
years after the death of al-Zahir, the Druze movement was able to resume
because the new leadership that replaced him had friendly political ties with
at least one prominent Druze leader. In 1043 Baha'uddin declared that the sect
would no longer accept new pledges, and since that time proselytization has
been prohibited. During the Crusades. It was during the period of Crusader rule
in Syria (1099–1291) that the Druze first emerged into the full light of
history in the Gharb region of the Chouf Mountains. As powerful warriors
serving the Muslim rulers of Damascus against the Crusades, the Druze were
given the task of keeping watch over the crusaders in the seaport of Beirut,
with the aim of preventing them from making any encroachments inland.
Subsequently, the Druze chiefs of the Gharb placed their considerable military
experience at the disposal of the Mamluk rulers of Egypt (1250–1516); first,
to assist them in putting an end to what remained of Crusader rule in coastal
Syria, and later to help them safeguard the Syrian coast against Crusader
retaliation by sea. In the early period of the Crusader era, the Druze feudal
power was in the hands of two families, the Tanukhs and the Arslans. From their
fortresses in the Gharb area (now in Aley District) of southern Mount Lebanon
Governorate, the Tanukhs led their incursions into the Phoenician coast and
finally succeeded in holding Beirut and the marine plain against the Franks.
Because of their fierce battles with the Crusaders, the Druzes earned the
respect of the Sunni Muslim Caliphs and thus gained important political powers.
After the middle of the twelfth century, the Ma'an family superseded the
Tanukhs in Druze leadership. The origin of the family goes back to a Prince
Ma'an who made his appearance in the Lebanon in the days of the 'Abbasid Caliph
al-Mustarshid (1118–35 AD). The Ma'ans chose for their abode the Chouf
District in south-western Lebanon (southern Mount Lebanon Governorate),
overlooking the maritime plain between Beirut and Sidon, and made their
headquarters in Baaqlin, which is still a leading Druze village. They were
invested with feudal authority by Sultan Nur ad-Din Zangi and furnished
respectable contingents to the Muslim ranks in their struggle against the
Crusaders. Persecution during the Mamluk and Ottoman period. Having cleared
Syria of the Franks, the Mamluk Sultans of Egypt turned their attention to the
schismatic Muslims of Syria. In 1305, after the issuing of a fatwa by the
scholar Ibn Taymiyyah calling for jihad against all non-Sunni Muslims like the
Druze, Alawites, Ismaili, and twelver Shiites, al-Malik al-Nasir inflicted a
disastrous defeat on the Druze at Keserwan and forced outward compliance on
their part to orthodox Sunni Islam. Later, under the Ottoman Turks, they were
severely attacked at Ayn-Ṣawfar in 1585 after the Ottomans claimed that they
assaulted their caravans near Tripoli. Consequently, the 16th and 17th
centuries were to witness a succession of armed Druze rebellions against the
Ottomans, countered by repeated Ottoman punitive expeditions against the Chouf,
in which the Druze population of the area was severely depleted and many
villages destroyed. These military measures, severe as they were, did not
succeed in reducing the local Druze to the required degree of subordination.
This led the Ottoman government to agree to an arrangement whereby the
different nahiyes (districts) of the Chouf would be granted in "iltizam"
("fiscal concession") to one of the region's amirs, or leading chiefs, leaving
the maintenance of law and order and the collection of its taxes in the area in
the hands of the appointed amir. This arrangement was to provide the
cornerstone for the privileged status which ultimately came to be enjoyed by
the whole of Mount Lebanon in Ottoman Syria, Druze and Christian areas alike.
Ma'an dynasty. With the advent of the Ottoman Turks and the conquest of Syria
by Sultan Selim I in 1516, the Ma'ans were acknowledged by the new rulers as
the feudal lords of southern Lebanon. Druze villages spread and prospered in
that region, which under Ma'an leadership so flourished that it acquired the
generic term of "Jabal Bayt-Ma'an" (the mountain of the Ma'an family) or "Jabal
al-Druze". The latter title has since been usurped by the Hawran region, which
since the middle of the 19th century has proven a haven of refuge to Druze
emigrants from Lebanon and has become the headquarters of Druze power. Under
Fakhr-al-Dīn II (Fakhreddin II), the Druze dominion increased until it
included almost all Syria, extending from the edge of the Antioch plain in the
north to Safad in the south, with a part of the Syrian desert dominated by
Fakhr-al-Din's castle at Tadmur (Palmyra), the ancient capital of Zenobia. The
ruins of this castle still stand on a steep hill overlooking the town. Fakhr-
al-Din became too strong for his Turkish sovereign in Constantinople. He went
so far in 1608 as to sign a commercial treaty with Duke Ferdinand I of Tuscany
containing secret military clauses. The Sultan then sent a force against him,
and he was compelled to flee the land and seek refuge in the courts of Tuscany
and Naples in 1614. In 1618 political changes in the Ottoman sultanate had
resulted in the removal of many enemies of Fakhr-al-Din from power, signaling
the prince's triumphant return to Lebanon soon afterwards. In 1632 Ahmad Koujak
was named Lord of Damascus. Koujak was a rival of Fakhr-al-Din and a friend of
the sultan Murad IV, who ordered Koujak and the sultanate's navy to attack
Lebanon and depose Fakhr-al-Din. This time the prince decided to remain in
Lebanon and resist the offensive, but the death of his son Ali in Wadi al-Taym
was the beginning of his defeat. He later took refuge in Jezzine's grotto,
closely followed by Koujak who eventually caught up with him and his family.
Fakhr-al-Din finally traveled to Turkey, appearing before the sultan, defending
himself so skillfully that the sultan gave him permission to return to Lebanon.
Later, however, the Sultan changed his orders and had Fakhr-al-Din and his
family killed on 13 April 1635 in Istanbul, bringing an end to an era in the
history of Lebanon, which would not regain its current boundaries until it was
proclaimed a mandate state and republic in 1920. Fakhr-al-Din was the first
ruler in modern Lebanon to open the doors of his country to foreign Western
influences. Under his auspices the French established a khān (hostel) in
Sidon, the Florentines a consulate, and Christian missionaries were admitted
into the country. Beirut and Sidon, which Fakhr-al-Din beautified, still bear
traces of his benign rule. Shihab Dynasty. As early as the days of Saladin, and
while the Ma'ans were still in complete control over southern Lebanon, the
Shihab tribe, originally Hijaz Arabs but later settled in Ḥawran, advanced
from Ḥawran, in 1172, and settled in Wadi al-Taym at the foot of mount
Hermon. They soon made an alliance with the Ma'ans and were acknowledged as the
Druze chiefs in "Wadi al-Taym". At the end of the 17th century (1697) the
Shihabs succeeded the Ma'ans in the feudal leadership of Druze southern
Lebanon, although they reportedly professed Sunni Islam, they showed sympathy
with Druzism, the religion of the majority of their subjects. The Shihab
leadership continued until the middle of the 19th century and culminated in the
illustrious governorship of Amir Bashir Shihab II (1788–1840) who, after
Fakhr-al-Din, was the most powerful feudal lord Lebanon produced. Though
governor of the Druze Mountain, Bashir was a crypto-Christian, and it was he
whose aid Napoleon solicited in 1799 during his campaign against Syria. Having
consolidated his conquests in Syria (1831–38), Ibrahim Pasha, son of the
viceroy of Egypt, Muhammad Ali Pasha, made the fatal mistake of trying to
disarm the Christians and Druzes of the Lebanon and to draft the latter into
his army. This was contrary to the principles of the life of independence which
these mountaineers had always lived, and resulted in a general uprising against
Egyptian rule. The uprising was encouraged, for political reasons, by the
British. The Druzes of Wadi al-Taym and Ḥawran, under the leadership of
Shibli al-Aryan, distinguished themselves in their stubborn resistance at their
inaccessible headquarters, "al-Laja", lying southeast of Damascus. Qaysites and
the Yemenites. The conquest of Syria by the Muslim Arabs in the middle of the
seventh century introduced into the land two political factions later called
the Qaysites and the Yemenites. The Qaysite party represented the Ḥijaz and
Bedouin Arabs who were regarded as inferior by the Yemenites who were earlier
and more cultured emigrants into Syria from southern Arabia. Druzes and
Christians grouped in political rather than religious parties so the party
lines in Lebanon obliterated racial and religious lines and the people grouped
themselves regardless of their religious affiliations, into one or the other of
these two parties. The sanguinary feuds between these two factions depleted, in
course of time, the manhood of the Lebanon and ended in the decisive battle of
Ain Dara in 1711, which resulted in the utter defeat of the Yemenite party.
Many Yemenite Druzes thereupon immigrated to the Hawran region and thus laid
the foundation of Druze power there. Civil War of 1860. The Druzes and their
Christian Maronite neighbors, who had thus far lived as religious communities
on friendly terms, entered a period of social disturbance in the year 1840,
which culminated in the civil war of 1860. After the Shehab dynasty converted
to Christianity, the Druze community and feudal leaders came under attack from
the regime with the collaboration of the Catholic Church, and the Druze lost
most of their political and feudal powers. Also, the Druze formed an alliance
with Britain and allowed Protestant missionaries to enter Mount Lebanon,
creating tension between them and the Catholic Maronites, who were supported by
the French. The Maronite-Druze conflict in 1840–60 was an outgrowth of the
Maronite Christian independence movement, directed against the Druze, Druze
feudalism, and the Ottoman-Turks. The civil war was not therefore a religious
war, except in Damascus, where it spread and where the vastly non-Druze
population was anti-Christian. The movement culminated with the 1859–60
massacre and defeat of the Christians by the Druzes. The civil war of 1860 cost
the Christians some ten thousand lives in Damascus, Zahlé, Deir al-Qamar,
Hasbaya, and other towns of Lebanon. The European powers then determined to
intervene, and authorized the landing in Beirut of a body of French troops
under General Beaufort d'Hautpoul, whose inscription can still be seen on the
historic rock at the mouth of Nahr al-Kalb. French intervention on behalf of
the Maronites did not help the Maronite national movement, since France was
restricted in 1860 by Britain, which did not want the Ottoman Empire
dismembered. But European intervention pressured the Turks to treat the
Maronites more justly. Following the recommendations of the powers, the Ottoman
Porte granted Lebanon local autonomy, guaranteed by the powers, under a
Christian governor. This autonomy was maintained until World War I. Rebellion
in Hauran. The Hauran rebellion was a violent Druze uprising against Ottoman
authority in the Syrian province, which erupted in 1909. The rebellion was led
by al-Atrash family in an aim to gain independence, but ended in brutal
suppression of the Druze, significant depopulation of the Hauran region and
execution of the Druze leaders in 1910. Modern history. In Lebanon, Syria, and
Israel, the Druze have official recognition as a separate religious community
with its own religious court system. Druze are known for their loyalty to the
countries they reside in, though they have a strong community feeling, in which
they identify themselves as related even across borders of countries. Despite
their practice of blending with dominant groups to avoid persecution, and
because the Druze religion does not endorse separatist sentiments but urges
blending with the communities they reside in, the Druze have had a history of
resistance to occupying powers, and they have at times enjoyed more freedom
than most other groups living in the Levant. In Syria. In Syria, most Druze
live in the Jebel al-Druze, a rugged and mountainous region in the southwest of
the country, which is more than 90 percent Druze inhabited; some 120 villages
are exclusively so. The Druze always played a far more important role in Syrian
politics than its comparatively small population would suggest. With a
community of little more than 100,000 in 1949, or roughly three percent of the
Syrian population, the Druze of Syria's southwestern mountains constituted a
potent force in Syrian politics and played a leading role in the nationalist
struggle against the French. Under the military leadership of Sultan Pasha al-
Atrash, the Druze provided much of the military force behind the Syrian
Revolution of 1925–27. In 1945, Amir Hasan al-Atrash, the paramount political
leader of the Jebel al-Druze, led the Druze military units in a successful
revolt against the French, making the Jebel al-Druze the first and only region
in Syria to liberate itself from French rule without British assistance. At
independence the Druze, made confident by their successes, expected that
Damascus would reward them for their many sacrifices on the battlefield. They
demanded to keep their autonomous administration and many political privileges
accorded them by the French and sought generous economic assistance from the
newly independent government. Well-led by the Atrash household and jealous of
their reputation as Arab nationalists and proud warriors, the Druze leaders
refused to be beaten into submission by Damascus or cowed by threats. When a
local paper in 1945 reported that President Shukri al-Quwatli (1943–49) had
called the Druzes a "dangerous minority", Sultan Pasha al-Atrash flew into a
rage and demanded a public retraction. If it were not forthcoming, he
announced, the Druzes would indeed become "dangerous" and a force of 4,000
Druze warriors would "occupy the city of Damascus." Quwwatli could not dismiss
Sultan Pasha's threat. The military balance of power in Syria was tilted in
favor of the Druzes, at least until the military build up during the 1948 War
in Palestine. One advisor to the Syrian Defense Department warned in 1946 that
the Syrian army was "useless", and that the Druzes could "take Damascus and
capture the present leaders in a breeze." During the four years of Adib
Shishakli's rule in Syria (December 1949 to February 1954) (on 25 August 1952:
Adib al-Shishakli created the Arab Liberation Movement (ALM), a progressive
party with pan-Arabist and socialist views), the Druze community was subjected
to a heavy attack by the Syrian regime. Shishakli believed that among his many
opponents in Syria, the Druzes were the most potentially dangerous, and he was
determined to crush them. He frequently proclaimed: "My enemies are like a
serpent: the head is the Jebel al-Druze, the stomach Homs, and the tail Aleppo.
If I crush the head the serpent will die." Shishakli dispatched 10,000 regular
troops to occupy the Jebel al-Druze. Several towns were bombarded with heavy
weapons, killing scores of civilians and destroying many houses. According to
Druze accounts, Shishakli encouraged neighboring bedouin tribes to plunder the
defenseless population and allowed his own troops to run amok. Shishakli
launched a brutal campaign to defame the Druzes for their religion and
politics. He accused the entire community of treason, at times claiming they
were agents of the British and Hashimites, at others that they were fighting
for Israel against the Arabs. He even produced a cache of Israeli weapons
allegedly discovered in the Jabal. Even more painful for the Druze community
was his publication of "falsified Druze religious texts" and false testimonials
ascribed to leading Druze sheikhs designed to stir up sectarian hatred. This
propaganda also was broadcast in the Arab world, mainly Egypt. Shishakli was
assassinated in Brazil on 27 September 1964 by a Druze seeking revenge for
Shishakli's bombardment of the Jebel al-Druze. He forcibly integrated
minorities into the national Syrian social structure, his "Syrianization" of
Alawite and Druze territories had to be accomplished in part using violence, he
declared: "My enemies are like serpent. The head is the Jabal Druze, if I crush
the head the serpent will die" (Seale 1963:132). To this end, al-Shishakli
encouraged the stigmatization of minorities. He saw minority demands as
tantamount to treason. His increasingly chauvinistic notions of Arab
nationalism were predicated on the denial that "minorities" existed in Syria.
After the Shishakli's military campaign, the Druze community lost a lot of its
political influence, but many Druze military officers played an important role
when it comes to the Baathist regime currently ruling Syria. In Lebanon. The
Druze community played an important role in the formation of the modern state
of Lebanon, and even though they are a minority they played an important role
in the Lebanese political scene. Before and during the Lebanese Civil War
(1975–90), the Druze were in favor of Pan-Arabism and Palestinian resistance
represented by the PLO. Most of the community supported the Progressive
Socialist Party formed by their leader Kamal Jumblatt and they fought alongside
other leftist and Palestinian parties against the Lebanese Front that was
mainly constituted of Christians. After the assassination of Kamal Jumblatt on
16 March 1977, his son Walid Jumblatt took the leadership of the party and
played an important role in preserving his father's legacy and sustained the
existence of the Druze community during the sectarian bloodshed that lasted
until 1990. In August 2001, Maronite Catholic Patriarch Nasrallah Boutros Sfeir
toured the predominantly Druze Chouf region of Mount Lebanon and visited
Mukhtara, the ancestral stronghold of Druze leader Walid Jumblatt. The
tumultuous reception that Sfeir received not only signified a historic
reconciliation between Maronites and Druze, who fought a bloody war in
1983–84, but underscored the fact that the banner of Lebanese sovereignty had
broad multi-confessional appeal and was a cornerstone for the Cedar Revolution.
The second largest political party supported by Druze is the Lebanese
Democratic Party led by Prince Talal Arslan, the son of Lebanese independence
hero Emir Majid Arslan. In Israel. The Druze form a religious minority in
Israel of more than 100,000, mostly residing in the north of the country. In
1967, a small community of Druze in the Golan Heights came under Israeli rule,
now growing to about 20,000 strong - only 500 of which hold Israeli citizenship
(the rest holding resident status). In 2004, there were 102,000 Druze living in
the country. In 2010, the population of Israeli Druze citizens grew to over
125,000. In 1957, the Israeli government designated the Druze a distinct ethnic
community at the request of its communal leaders. The Druze are Arabic-speaking
citizens of Israel, who are drafted into mandatory service in the Israel
Defense Forces. Members of the community have attained top positions in Israeli
politics and public service. The number of Druze parliament members usually
exceeds their proportion in the Israeli population, integrated within several
political parties. Beliefs of the Druze. The Druze are considered to be a
social group as well as a religious sect, but not a distinct ethnic group. Also
complicating their identity is the custom of Taqiya—concealing or disguising
their beliefs when necessary—that they adopted from Shia Islam and the
esoteric nature of the faith, in which many teachings are kept secretive. Druze
in different states can have radically different lifestyles. Some claim to be
Muslim, some do not. The Druze faith is said to abide by Islamic principles,
but they tend to be separatist in their treatment of Druze-hood, and their
religion differs from mainstream Islam on a number of fundamental points. God
in the Druze faith. The Druze conception of the deity is declared by them to be
one of strict and uncompromising unity. The main Druze doctrine states that God
is both transcendent and immanent, in which he is above all attributes but at
the same time he is present. In their desire to maintain a rigid confession of
unity, they stripped from God all attributes ("tanzīh") which may lead to
polytheism ("shirk"). In God, there are no attributes distinct from his
essence. He is wise, mighty, and just, not by wisdom, might and justice, but by
his own essence. God is "the whole of existence", rather than "above existence"
or on his throne, which would make him "limited." There is neither "how",
"when", nor "where" about him; he is incomprehensible. In this dogma, they are
similar to the semi-philosophical, semi-religious body which flourished under
Al-Ma'mun and was known by the name of Mu'tazila and the fraternal order of the
Brethren of Purity "(Ikhwan al-Ṣafa)". Unlike the "Mu'tazilla", however, and
similar to some branches of Sufism, the Druze believe in the concept of
"Tajalli" (meaning "theophany"). "Tajalli", which is more often misunderstood
by scholars and writers and is usually confused with the concept of
incarnation, The concept of God incarnating either as or in a human seems "to
contradict with what the Druze scriptural view has to teach about the Oneness
of God, while tajalli is at the center of the Druze and some other, often
mystical, traditions." Scriptures. Druze Sacred texts include the Kitab Al
Hikma (Epistles of Wisdom). Sanctuaries. The prayer-houses of the Druze are
called khalwa or khalwat and are used in place of mosques. The primary
sanctuary of the Druze is at Khalwat al-Bayada. Esotericism. The Druze believe
that many teachings given by prophets, religious leaders and holy books have
esoteric meanings preserved for those of intellect, in which some teachings are
symbolic and allegorical in nature, and divide the understanding of holy books
and teachings into three layers. Unlike some Islamic esoteric movements, known
as the "batinids" at that time, the Druzes don't believe that the esoteric
meaning abrogates or necessarily abolishes the exoteric one. Hamza bin Ali
refutes such claims by stating that if the esoteric interpretation of "taharah"
(purity) is purity of the heart and soul, it doesn't mean that a person can
discard his physical purity, as "salah" (prayer) is useless if a person is
untruthful in his speech and that the esoteric and exoteric meanings complement
each other. Precepts of the Druze faith. The Druze follow seven precepts that
are considered the core of the faith, and are perceived by them as the essence
of the pillars of Islam. Religious symbol. The Druze strictly avoid iconography
but use five colors as a religious symbol: green, red, yellow, blue, and white.
Each color pertains to a metaphysical power called ', literally meaning a
limit, as in the limits that separate humans from animals, or the powers that
makes the animal body human. Each ' is color coded in the following manner:
green for ' "the Universal Mind/Nous", red for ' "the Universal Soul/Anima
mundi", yellow for ' "the Word/Logos", blue for ' "the Potentiality/Cause/
Precedent", and white for ' "the Future/Effect/Immanence". The mind generates
qualia and gives consciousness. The soul embodies the mind and is responsible
for transmigration and the character of oneself. The word which is the atom of
language communicates qualia between humans and represent the platonic forms in
the sensible world. The ' and "" is the ability to perceive and learn from the
past and plan for the future and predict it. The colors can be arranged in a
vertically descending stripes or a five-pointed star. The stripes is a
diagrammatic cut of the spheres in neoplatonic philosophy while the five
pointed star embodies the golden ratio, phi, as a symbol of temperance and a
life of moderation. ʻUqqāl and Juhhāl. The Druze are divided into two
groups. The largely secular majority, called "al-Juhhāl" (جهال) ("the
Ignorant") are not granted access to the Druze holy literature or allowed to
attend the initiated "Uqqal"'s religious meetings. They are around 80% of the
Druze population and are not obliged to follow the ascetic traditions of the
"Uqqal". The initiated religious group, which includes both men and women
(about 20% of the population), is called "al-ʻUqqāl" (عقال), ("the
Knowledgeable Initiates"). They have a special mode of dress designed to comply
with Quranic traditions. Women can opt to wear "al-mandīl", a loose white
veil, especially in the presence of other people. They wear "al-mandīl" on
their heads to cover their hair and wrap it around their mouths and sometimes
over their noses as well. They wear black shirts and long skirts covering their
legs to their ankles. Male "ʻuqqāl" grow mustaches, and wear dark Levantine/
Turkish traditional dresses, called the "shirwal", with white turbans that vary
according to the "Uqqal"'s hierarchy. "Al-ʻuqqāl" have equal rights to "al-
Juhhāl", but establish a hierarchy of respect based on religious service.The
most influential 5% of "Al-ʻuqqāl" become "Ajawīd", recognized religious
leaders, and from this group the spiritual leaders of the Druze are assigned.
While the "Shaykh al-ʻAql", which is an official position in Syria, Lebanon,
and Israel, is elected by the local community and serves as the head of the
Druze religious council, judges from the Druze religious courts are usually
elected for this position. Unlike the spiritual leaders, the "Shaykh al-
ʻAql's" authority is local to the country he is elected in, though in some
instances spiritual leaders are elected to this position. The Druze believe in
the unity of God, and are often known as the "People of Monotheism" or simply
"Monotheists". Their theology has a Neo-Platonic view about how God interacts
with the world through emanations and is similar to some gnostic and other
esoteric sects. Druze philosophy also shows Sufi influences. Druze principles
focus on honesty, loyalty, filial piety, altruism, patriotic sacrifice, and
monotheism. They reject tobacco smoking, alcohol, and consumption of pork.
Also, in contrast to most Islamic sects, the Druze reject polygamy, believe in
reincarnation, and are not obliged to observe most of the religious rituals.
The Druze believe that rituals are symbolic and have an individualistic effect
on the person, for which reason Druze are free to perform them, or not. The
community does celebrate Eid al-Adha, however, considered their most
significant holiday. Origins of the Druze people. Ethnic origins. The Druze
faith extended to many areas in the Middle East, but most of the surviving
modern Druze can trace their origin to the "Wadi al-Taymour " in South Lebanon,
which is named after an Arab tribe "Taymour-Allah (formerly Taymour-Allat) "
which, according to Islamic historian, al-Tabari, first came from Arabia into
the valley of the Euphrates where they were Christianized prior to their
migration into the Lebanon. Many of the Druze feudal families whose genealogies
have been preserved by the two modern Syrian chroniclers Haydar al-Shihabi and
al-Shidyaq seem also to point in the direction of this origin. Arabian tribes
emigrated via the Persian Gulf and stopped in Iraq on the route that was later
to lead them to Syria. The first feudal Druze family, the Tanukh family, which
made for itself a name in fighting the Crusaders, was, according to Haydar al-
Shihabi, an Arab tribe from Mesopotamia where it occupied the position of a
ruling family and apparently was Christianized. The Tanukhs must have left
Arabia as early as the second or third century A.D. The Ma'an tribe, which
superseded the Tanukhs and produced the greatest Druze hero in history, Fakhr-
al-Din, had the same traditional origin. The "Talhuq" family and " 'Abd-al-
Malik", who supplied the later Druze leadership, have the same record as the
Tanukhs. The Imad family is named for "al-Imadiyyah" — the Kurdish town of
Amadiya, northeast of Mosul inside Kurdistan, and, like the Jumblatts, is
thought to be of Kurdish origin. The Arsalan family claims descent from the
Hirah Arab kings, but the name "Arsalan" (Persian and Turkish for lion)
suggests Persian influence, if not origin. The 1911 edition of Encyclopædia
Britannica states that the Druzes are "a mixture of refugee stocks, in which
the Arab largely predominates, grafted on to an original mountain population of
Aramaic blood." According to Jewish contemporary literature, the Druze, who
were visited by Benjamin of Tudela, were described as descendants of the
Itureans — an Ismaelite Arab tribe, which used to reside in the northern
parts of the Golan plateau through Hellenistic and Roman periods. Nevertheless,
many scholars formed their own hypotheses: for example, Lamartine (1835)
discovered in the modern Druzes the remnants of the Samaritans; Earl of
Carnarvon (1860), those of the Cuthites whom Esarhaddon transplanted into
Palestine; Professor Felix von Luschan (1911), according to his conclusions
from anthropometric measurements, makes the Druze, Maronites, and Alawites of
Syria, together with the Bektashis, 'Ali-Ilahis, and Yezidis of Asia Minor and
Persia, the modern representatives of the ancient Hittites. During the 18th
century, there were two branches of Druze living in Lebanon: the Yemeni Druze,
headed by the Hamdan and Al-Atrash families; and the Kaysi Druze, headed by the
Jumblat and Arsalan families. The Hamdan family was banished from Mount Lebanon
following the battle of Ain Dara in 1711. The battle was fought between two
Druze factions: the Yemeni and the Kaysi. Following their dramatic defeat, the
Yemeni faction migrated to Syria in the Jebel-Druze region and its capital,
Soueida. However, it has been argued that these two factions were of political
nature rather than ethnic, and had both Christian and Druze supporters. Druhyus
were described in Rigveda. Sudas, the king of a vast region between rivers
Saraswati, Drishadvati and Yamuna was follower of the famous vedic seers-
Vasishtha and vishwamitra. Ten kings from the kingdom of the west and northwest
lead by Druhyus challanged sudas. Sudas defeated these kings at the battle of
kurukshetra. In another battle near Mathura, he also defeated Turvashas from
the east. This war is considered a major event of Rigvedic period. Many
scholars believe that the present day population of Druze in Lebanon and Syria
of the Middle East migrated after the wars- mainly Mandhata's and suda's wars."
Genetics. In a 2005 study of ASPM gene variants, Mekel-Bobrov et al. found that
the Israeli Druze people of the Carmel region have among the highest rate of
the newly evolved ASPM haplogroup D, at 52.2% occurrence of the approximately
6,000-year-old allele. While it is not yet known exactly what selective
advantage is provided by this gene variant, the haplogroup D allele is thought
to be positively selected in populations and to confer some substantial
advantage that has caused its frequency to rapidly increase. According to DNA
testing, Druze are remarkable for the high frequency (35%) of males who carry
the Y-chromosomal haplogroup L, which is otherwise uncommon in the Mideast
(Shen et al. 2004). This haplogroup originates from prehistoric South Asia and
has spread from Pakistan into southern Iran. Cruciani in 2007 found E1b1b1a2
(E-V13) from Sub Clades of E1b1b1a1 (E-V12) in high levels (>10% of the male
population) in Turkish Cypriot and Druze Arab lineages. Recent genetic
clustering analyses of ethnic groups are consistent with the close ancestral
relationship between the Druze and Cypriots, and also identified similarity to
the general Syrian and Lebanese populations, as well as a variety of Jewish
groups (Ashkenazi, Sephardi, Iraqi, and Moroccan) (Behar et al 2010). Also, a
new study concluded that the Druze harbor a remarkable diversity of
mitochondrial DNA lineages that appear to have separated from each other
thousands of years ago. But instead of dispersing throughout the world after
their separation, the full range of lineages can still be found within the
Druze population. The researchers noted that the Druze villages contained a
striking range of high frequency and high diversity of the X haplogroup,
suggesting that this population provides a glimpse into the past genetic
landscape of the Near East at a time when the X haplogroup was more prevalent.
These findings are consistent with the Druze oral tradition, that claims that
the adherents of the faith came from diverse ancestral lineages stretching back
tens of thousands of years.
