Evangelicalism Evangelicalism is a Protestant Christian movement that began in
the 17th century and became an organized movement with the emergence around
1730 of the Methodists in England and the Pietists among Lutherans in Germany
and Scandinavia. The movement became even more significant in the United States
during the series of Great Awakenings of the 18th and 19th centuries, where it
drew far more members than in Europe. It continues to draw adherents globally
in the 21st century, especially in the developing world. Evangelicalism de-
emphasizes ritual and emphasizes the piety of the individual, requiring him or
her to meet certain active commitments, including: David Bebbington has termed
these four distinctive aspects "conversionism", "biblicism", "crucicentrism",
and "activism", noting, "Together they form a quadrilateral of priorities that
is the basis of Evangelicalism." Usage. The term evangelical has its
etymological roots in the Greek word for "gospel" or "good news":
"ευαγγελιον (evangelion)", from "eu-" "good" and "angelion"
"message". In that sense, to be an evangelical would mean to be a believer of
the Gospel, that is the message of Jesus Christ. By the English Middle Ages the
term had been expanded to include not only the message, but also the New
Testament which contained the message, as well as more specifically the four
books of the Bible in which the life, death and resurrection of Jesus are
portrayed. The first published use of the term "evangelical" in English was in
1531 by William Tyndale, who wrote "He exhorteth them to proceed constantly in
the evangelical truth." One year later, the earliest recorded use in reference
to a theological distinction was by Sir Thomas More, who spoke of "Tyndale his
evangelical brother Barns". By the time of the Protestant Reformation,
Protestant theologians began to embrace the term evangelical as referring to
"gospel truth". Martin Luther referred to the "evangelische Kirche" or
evangelical Church to distinguish Protestants from Catholics in the Roman
Catholic Church. In Germany, Switzerland and Denmark, and especially among
Lutherans, the term has continued to be used in a broad sense. This can be seen
in the names of certain Lutheran denominations or national organizations, such
as the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, the Wisconsin Evangelical
Lutheran Synod, the Evangelical Lutheran Church in Canada, and the Evangelical
Church in Germany. Current usage. Although often used in a religious context,
the term may also characterize a generic missionary, reforming, or redeeming
impulse or purpose. For example, the "Times Literary Supplement" refers to "the
rise and fall of evangelical fervor within the Socialist movement". The
contemporary North American usage of the term reflects the impact of the
evangelical/fundamentalist controversy of the early 20th century.
Evangelicalism may sometimes be perceived as the middle ground between the
theological liberalism of the mainline denominations and the cultural
separatism of fundamentalism. Evangelicalism has therefore been described as
"the third of the leading strands in American Protestantism, straddl the divide
between fundamentalists and liberals". In 2004 Andrew Crouch wrote in
"Christianity Today": "The emerging movement is a protest against much of
evangelicalism as currently practiced. The emerging church movement is post-
evangelical in the way that neo-evangelicalism (in the 1950s) was post-
fundamentalist. It would not be unfair to call it postmodern evangelicalism."
While the North American perception has a certain importance in understanding
some usage of the term, it by no means dominates a wider global view: elsewhere
the fundamentalist debate had less direct influence. By the mid-1950s, largely
due to the ecumenical evangelism of Billy Graham, the terms "evangelicalism"
and "fundamentalism" began to refer to two different approaches. Fundamentalism
aggressively attacked its liberal enemies; Evangelicalism downplayed liberalism
and emphasized outreach and conversion of new members While some conservative
evangelicals believe the label has "broadened" too much beyond its more
limiting traditional distinctives, this trend is nonetheless strong enough to
create significant ambiguity in the term. As a result, the dichotomy between
"evangelical" and "mainline" denominations is increasingly complex,
particularly with such innovations as the "emergent church" movement. History.
17th century. The work of the Pietists Philipp Jakob Spener and August Hermann
Francke is the theological and practical beginning of Evangelicalism. The
Francke Foundations in Halle became the training ground for many priests of the
New World, above all for the United States. The German Pietists believed the
personal experience of enlightenment was the central reason to find the way to
the good, and the spreading of the faith was best pursued by individual piety.
18th century. Evangelical movements first emerged between 1730 and 1790 with
Pietism in Germany and the Netherlands, and Methodism in England and America.
They featured revivals and an emphasis on personal salvation and piety, while
downplaying rituals and traditions. In the American colonies the First Great
Awakening of the 1740s greatly expanded the movement; it was based on revivals
led by Congregationalist Jonathan Edwards and Methodist George Whitefield. In
England John Wesley led the Methodist movement inside the Church of England.
19th century. The start of the 19th century saw an increase in missionary work
and many of the major missionary societies were founded around this time (see
Timeline of Christian missions). The Second Great Awakening (which actually
began in 1790) was primarily an American revivalist movement and resulted in
substantial growth of the Methodist and Baptist churches. Charles Grandison
Finney was an important preacher of this period. Evangelicals were also
concerned with social reform during this period—in England the Clapham Sect
included figures such as William Wilberforce who successfully campaigned for
the abolition of slavery. John Nelson Darby was a 19th century English minister
considered to be the father of modern Dispensationalism, an innovative
Protestant movement significant in the development of modern evangelicalism.
Cyrus Scofield further promoted the influence of this theology through his
Scofield Reference Bible. Other notable figures of the latter half of the 19th
century include Charles Spurgeon and Dwight L. Moody. In Charlotte Bronte's
novel, "Jane Eyre", Mr Brocklehurst illustrates the dangers and hypocrisies
that Charlotte Brontë perceived in the nineteenth-century Evangelical
movement. 20th century. Evangelicalism in the early part of the 20th century
was dominated by the fundamentalist movement, which rejected liberal theology
and focused on separation from the world. Following the Welsh Revival, the
Azusa Street Revival in 1906 began the spread of Pentecostalism in North
America. In the post–World War II period, a split developed amongst
evangelicals, as they disagreed among themselves about how a Christian ought to
respond to an unbelieving world. The evangelicals urged that Christians must
engage the culture directly and constructively, and they began to express
reservations about being known to the world as "fundamentalists". As Kenneth
Kantzer put it at the time, the name "fundamentalist" had become "an
embarrassment instead of a badge of honor". The term "neo-evangelicalism" was
coined by Harold Ockenga in 1947 to identify a distinct movement within self-
identified fundamentalist Christianity at the time, especially in the English-
speaking world. It described the mood of positivism and non-militancy that
characterized that generation. The new generation of evangelicals set as their
goals to abandon a militant Bible stance. Instead, they would pursue dialogue,
intellectualism, non-judgmentalism, and appeasement. They further called for an
increased application of the gospel to the sociological, political, and
economic areas. Not all conservatives are pleased with the new direction. One
author has termed it "the apostasy within evangelicalism". The self-identified
fundamentalists also cooperated in separating their opponents from the
"fundamentalist" name, by increasingly seeking to distinguish themselves from
the more open group, whom they often characterized derogatorily, by Ockenga's
term, "neo-evangelical" or just evangelical. The fundamentalists saw the
evangelicals as often being too concerned about social acceptance and
intellectual respectability, and being too accommodating to a perverse
generation that needed correction. In addition, they saw the efforts of
evangelist Billy Graham, who worked with non-evangelical denominations, such as
the Roman Catholics (which they claimed to be heretical), as a mistake. The
post-war period also saw growth of the ecumenical movement and the founding of
the World Council of Churches, which was generally regarded with suspicion by
the evangelical community. In the United Kingdom, John Stott and Martyn Lloyd-
Jones emerged as key leaders in evangelical Christianity. The charismatic
movement began in the 1960s and resulted in Pentecostal theology and practice
being introduced into many mainline denominations. New charismatic groups such
as the Association of Vineyard Churches and Newfrontiers trace their roots to
this period (see also British New Church Movement). The closing years of the
20th century saw controversial postmodern influences entering some parts of
evangelicalism, particularly with the emerging church movement. Meaning of
Evangelicalism. Adherents. The movement is highly diverse and encompasses a
vast number of people. Because the group is diverse, not all of them use the
same terminology for beliefs. For instance, several recent studies and surveys
by sociologists and political scientists that utilize more complex definitional
parameters have estimated the number of evangelicals in the U.S. at about
25–30% of the population, or roughly between 70 and 80 million people. From
the late 20th century onwards, such conservative Protestant Christians, and
their churches and social movements, have often been called "evangelical" to
distinguish them from other Protestants. Since the Iraq War, evangelicalism has
begun to make inroads in Iraq, capitalizing on a new openness to Western
missionaries following the US-led invasion of the country, although the vast
majority of converts are from other sects of Christianity present in Iraq.
Contemporary North American perspective. Evangelicals held the view that the
modernist and liberal parties in the Protestant churches had surrendered their
heritage as evangelicals by accommodating the views and values of "the world".
At the same time, they criticized fundamentalists for their separatism and
their rejection of the social gospel as it had been developed by Protestant
activists of the previous century. They charged the modernists with having lost
their identity as evangelicals and the fundamentalists with having lost the
Christ-like heart of evangelicalism. They argued that the gospel needed to be
reassessed to distinguish it from the innovations of the liberals as well as
the fundamentalists. Today, evangelicals are often concerned with their own
failure to live up to Christian standards in contrast to the world.
"Christianity Today" author Mark Galli says "It's now pretty much agreed that
the evangelical church mirrors the dysfunctions of secular society, from
premarital sex stats to divorce rates to buying habits. Much to our dismay, we
are hardly a light to the world, nor an icon of the abundant, transformed
life." Global demographics. On a worldwide scale evangelical churches (together
with Pentecostals) claim to be the most rapidly growing Christian churches. The
two often overlap, in a movement sometimes called transformationalism. Churches
in Africa exhibit rapid growth and great diversity in part because they are not
dependent on European and North American evangelical sources. An example of
this can be seen in the African Initiated Churches. The World Evangelical
Alliance is "a network of churches in 128 nations that have each formed an
evangelical alliance and over 100 international organizations joining together
to give a worldwide identity, voice and platform" to an estimated more than 600
million evangelical Christians. The Alliance was formed in 1951 by evangelicals
from 21 countries. It has worked to support its members to work together
globally. In Britain, according to a 2005 study conducted by the Assemblies of
God, evangelicals give 7.5% of their income to their churches and a further 3%
to Christian charities. Types of evangelicalism. Conservative evangelicalism.
Toward the end of the 20th century, some have tended to confuse
"evangelicalism" and "fundamentalism", but as noted above they are not the
same. The labels represent very distinct differences of approach that both
groups are diligent to maintain, although because of fundamentalism's
dramatically smaller size it often gets classified simply as an ultra-
conservative branch of evangelicalism. Both groups seek to maintain an identity
as theological conservatives; evangelicals, however, seek to distance
themselves from stereotypical perceptions of the "fundamentalist" posture of
antagonism toward the larger society and advocate involvement in the
surrounding community rather than separation from it. However, despite the
differences, some people, particularly those with a non-denominational
background, may consider themselves both evangelical and fundamentalist because
they believe in the engaging practices of evangelicalism and take a fundamental
view of the Bible. On the American political spectrum, evangelicals
traditionally fall under socially conservative. Based on the view that marriage
is only between one man and one woman, they oppose state recognition of same-
sex marriage. Since the 1970s they have also opposed abortion. (See below for
more details). Open evangelicalism. "Open Evangelical" refers to a particular
Christian school of thought or Churchmanship, primarily in the United Kingdom
(especially in the Church of England). Open evangelicals describe their
position as combining a traditional evangelical emphasis on the nature of
scriptural authority, the teaching of the ecumenical creeds and other
traditional doctrinal teachings, with an approach towards culture and other
theological points of view which tends to be more inclusive than that taken by
other evangelicals. Some open evangelicals aim to take a middle position
between conservative and charismatic evangelicals, while others would combine
conservative theological emphases with more liberal social positions. Post-
evangelicalism. British author Dave Tomlinson characterizes post-evangelicalism
as a movement comprising various trends of dissatisfaction among evangelicals.
The term is used by others with comparable intent, often to distinguish
evangelicals in the so-called emerging church movement from post-evangelicals
and anti-evangelicals. Tomlinson argues that "linguistically, the distinction
"evangelical and post-evangelical" is similar to the one that sociologists make
between the modern and postmodern eras". There persists considerable and
inevitable confusion as to how best to classify the non-traditional/non-
conservative forms of evangelicalism. Some call the emerging church movement a
version or manifestation of post-evangelicalism, whereas others distinguish
both under the broader umbrella of the "evangelical left" movement. As such
developments are still relatively new, it remains to be seen how the categories
and semantics will settle. Evangelicalism in the United States. Demographics.
The 2004 survey of religion and politics in the United States identified the
evangelical percentage of the population at 26.3 percent while Roman Catholics
are 22 percent and mainline Protestants make up 16 percent. In the 2007
Statistical Abstract of the United States, the figures for these same groups
are 28.6 percent (evangelical), 24.5 percent (Roman Catholic), and 13.9 percent
(mainline Protestant.) The latter figures are based on a 2001 study of the
self-described religious identification of the adult population for 1990 and
2001 from the Graduate School and University Center at the City University of
New York. A 2008 study showed that in the year 2000 about 9 percent of
Americans attended an evangelical service on any given Sunday. The Economist
estimated in May 2012 that "over one-third of Americans, more than 100m, can be
considered evangelical". The National Association of Evangelicals is a U.S.
agency which coordinates cooperative ministry for its member denominations.
Politics. Christian right in politics. Evangelical political influence in
America was first evident in the 1830s with movements such as abolition of
slavery and the prohibition movement, which closed saloons and taverns in state
after state until it succeeded nationally in 1919. The Christian right is a
coalition of numerous groups of traditionalist and observant church-goers of
every kind: especially Catholics on issues such as birth control and abortion,
Southern Baptists, Missouri Synod Lutherans,and others. Evangelical political
activists are not all on the right. There is a small group of liberal white
evangelicals. Most African Americans belong to Baptist, Methodist or other
denominations that share evangelical beliefs; they are firmly in the Democratic
coalition and (except for gay and abortion issues) are generally liberal in
politics. Abortion. Since 1970 a central issue motivating conservative
evangelicals' political activism is abortion. Theologically they argue abortion
is the taking of an innocent life. Pro-choice advocates oppose the evangelicals
on abortion and argue that any legal restrictions based on such a religious
worldview amount to imposing religion. Abortion was not a crime under English
and American common law at least until the "quickening" of the fetus.
Physicians—not religious leaders—were responsible for enacting the 19th
century laws against abortion in the name of protecting the mother and stopping
quacks from operating. The 1973 decision in "Roe v. Wade" by the Supreme Court
said women have a right to choose abortion; with some modifications, that
remains the law. It proved decisive in bringing together Catholics (who had
opposed abortion since the 1890s) and evangelicals in a political coalition in
the 1970s, which became known as the Religious Right when it successfully
mobilized its voters behind presidential candidate Ronald Reagan in 1980.
School prayer. In the United States, Supreme Court decisions that outlawed
organized prayer in school and restricted church-related schools also played a
role in mobilizing the Religious Right. In addition, questions of sexual
morality and homosexuality have been energizing factors—and above all, the
fear that "elites" are pushing America into secularism. Other issues. According
to recent reports in the "New York Times", some evangelicals have sought to
expand their movement's social agenda to include poverty, combating AIDS in the
Third World, and protecting the environment. This is highly contentious within
the evangelical community, since more conservative evangelicals believe that
this trend is compromising important issues and prioritizing popularity and
consensus too highly. Personifying this division were the evangelical leaders
James Dobson and Rick Warren, the former who warned of the dangers of a Barack
Obama victory in 2008 from his point of view, in contrast with the latter who
declined to endorse either major candidate on the grounds that he wanted the
church to be less politically divisive and that he agreed substantially with
both men. Indeed many are not sure how to characterize Rick Warren on the
evangelical spectrum; despite his avowed centrism he recently supported
California's controversial Proposition 8 (2008), which is regarded by critics
as a right-wing position. Christian nation. Some opponents have argued that the
evangelicals actually want a Christian America—that is a nation in which
Christianity is given a privileged position. Survey data shows that 60–75% of
evangelicals reject proposals for a Christian America. Evangelical leaders
retort they merely seek freedom from the imposition by national elites of an
equally subjective secular worldview, and feel that it is their opponents who
are violating their rights. Christian left. Typically, members of the
evangelical left affirm the primary tenets of evangelical theology, such as the
doctrines of Incarnation, atonement, and resurrection, and also see the Bible
as a primary authority for the church. A major theological difference, however,
which in turn leads to many of the social/political differences, is the issue
of how strictly to interpret the Bible, as well as what particular values and
principles predominantly constitute the "biblical worldview" believed to be
binding upon all followers. Inevitably, battles over how to characterize each
other and themselves ensue, with the evangelical left and right often
hyperbolically regarding each other as "mainline/non-evangelical" and
"fundamentalist" respectively. Unlike conservative evangelicals, the
evangelical left is generally opposed to capital punishment and supportive of
gun control. In many cases, evangelical leftists are pacifistic. Some promote
the legalization of same-sex marriage or protection of access to abortion for
the society at large without necessarily endorsing the practice themselves.
There is considerable dispute over how to even characterize the various
segments of the evangelical theological and political spectra, and whether a
singular discernible rift between "right" and "left" is oversimplified.
However, to the extent that some simplifications are necessary to discuss any
complex issue, it is recognized that modern trends like focusing on non-
contentious issues (like poverty) and downplaying hot-button social issues
(like abortion) tend to be key distinctives of the modern "evangelical left" or
"emergent church" movement. Evangelical environmentalism. Evangelical
environmentalism is an environmental movement in the United States in which
some Evangelicals have emphasized biblical mandates concerning humanity's role
as steward and subsequent responsibility for the caretaking of Creation. While
the movement has focused on different environmental issues, it is best known
for its focus of addressing climate action from a biblically grounded
theological perspective. The "Evangelical Climate Initiative" argues that
human-induced climate change will have severe consequences and impact the poor
the hardest, and that God's mandate to Adam to care for the Garden of Eden also
applies to Christians today, and that it is therefore a moral obligation to
work to mitigate climate impacts and support communities in adapting to change.
