Falun Gong Falun Gong or Falun Dafa (literally means "Dharma Wheel Practice" or
"Law Wheel Practice") is a spiritual discipline first introduced in China in
1992 through public lectures by its founder, Li Hongzhi. It combines the
practice of meditation and slow-moving qigong exercises with a moral
philosophy. Falun Gong emphasizes morality and the cultivation of virtue in its
central tenets of Truthfulness, Compassion, and Forbearance (), and identifies
as a qigong practice of the Buddhist school, though its teachings also
incorporate elements drawn from Taoist traditions. Through moral rectitude and
the practice of meditation, practitioners of Falun Gong aspire to better health
and, ultimately, spiritual enlightenment. Falun Gong emerged at the end of
China's ""qigong" boom"‚Äîa period which saw the proliferation of similar
practices of meditation, slow-moving exercises and regulated breathing. It
differs from other "qigong" schools in its absence of fees or formal
membership, lack of daily rituals of worship, its greater emphasis on morality,
and the theological nature of its teachings. Western academics have described
Falun Gong as a qigong discipline, a "spiritual movement" based on the
teachings of its founder, a "cultivation system" in the tradition of Chinese
antiquity, and sometimes a religion or new religious movement. Although the
practice initially enjoyed considerable support from Chinese officialdom, by
the mid- to late-1990s, the Communist Party and public security organs
increasingly viewed Falun Gong as a potential threat due to its size,
independence from the state, and spiritual teachings. By 1999, some estimates
placed the number of Falun Gong adherents in the tens of millions. On 20 July
1999, after three years of mounting tensions between the group and the
government, the Communist Party leadership initiated a nationwide crackdown and
multifaceted propaganda campaign intended to eradicate the practice. In October
1999 it declared Falun Gong a "heretical organization" and blocked Internet
access to websites that mention Falun Gong. Human rights groups report that
Falun Gong practitioners in China are subject to a wide range of human rights
abuses; hundreds of thousands are believed to have been imprisoned
extrajudicially, and practitioners in detention are subject to forced labor,
psychiatric abuse, torture, and other coercive methods of thought reform at the
hands of Chinese authorities. In the years since the suppression campaign
began, Falun Gong adherents have emerged as a prominent voice in the Chinese
dissident community, advocating for greater human rights and an end to
Communist Party rule. Li Hongzhi has lived in the United States since 1996, and
Falun Gong has a sizable global constituency; inside China, some sources
estimate that millions may continue to practice Falun Gong in spite of
suppression. Hundreds of thousands are believed to practice Falun Gong outside
China across some 70 countries worldwide. Origins. Falun Gong is most
frequently identified with the qigong movement in China. "Qigong" is a modern
term that refers to a variety of practices involving slow movement, meditation,
and regulated breathing. Qigong-like exercises have historically been practiced
by Buddhist monks, Daoist martial artists, and Confucian scholars as a means of
spiritual, moral, and physical refinement. The modern qigong movement emerged
in the early 1950s, when Communist cadres embraced the techniques as a way to
improve health. The new term was constructed to avoid association with
religious practices, that were prone to being labeled as "feudal superstition"
and persecuted during the Maoist era. Early adopters of qigong eschewed its
religious overtones, and regarded qigong principally as a branch of Chinese
medicine. In the late 1970s, Chinese scientists purported to have "discovered"
the material existence of the qi energy which qigong seeks to harness, thus
lending a level of scientific credibility to the movement. In the spiritual
vacuum of the post-Mao era, tens of millions of mostly urban and elderly
Chinese citizens took up the practice of qigong, and a variety of charismatic
qigong masters established practices. At one time, over 2,000 disciplines of
qigong were being taught. The state-run China Qigong Science Research Society
(CQRS) was established in 1985 to oversee and administer the movement. On 13
May 1992, Li Hongzhi gave his first public seminar on Falun Gong (alternatively
called Falun Dafa) in the northeastern city of Changchun. In his hagiographic
spiritual biography, Li Hongzhi is said to have been taught ways of
"cultivation practice" by several masters of the Buddhist and Daoist
traditions, including Quan Jue, the 10th Heir to the Great Law of the Buddha
School; a Taoist master from age eight to twelve; and a master of the Great Way
School with the Taoist alias of "True Taoist" from the Changbai Mountains.
Falun Dafa is said to be the result of his reorganizing and writing down the
teachings that were passed to him. Li presented Falun Gong as part of a
"centuries-old tradition of cultivation", and in effect sought to revive the
religious and spiritual elements of qigong practice that had been discarded in
the earlier Communist era. David Palmer writes that Li "redefined his method as
having entirely different objectives from qigong: the purpose of practice
should neither be physical health nor the development of extraordinary powers,
but to purify one's heart and attain spiritual salvation." Falun Gong is
distinct from other qigong schools in that its teachings cover a wide range of
spiritual and metaphysical topics, placing emphasis on morality and virtue, and
elaborating a complete cosmology. The practice identifies with the Buddhist
School ("Fojia"), but also draws on concepts and language found in Taoism and
Confucianism. This has led some scholars to label the practice as a syncretic
faith. Beliefs and practices. Central teachings. Falun Gong aspires to enable
the practitioner to ascend spiritually through moral rectitude and the practice
of a set of exercises and meditation. The three central tenets of the belief
are 'Truthfulness' (Áúû, Zhƒìn), 'Compassion' (ÂñÑ, Sh√ n), and 'Forbearance'
(Âøç, Rƒõn). Together these principles are regarded as the fundamental nature
of the cosmos, the criterion for differentiating right from wrong, and are held
to be the highest manifestation of the Tao, or Buddhist Dharma. Adherence to
and cultivation of these virtues is regarded as a fundamental part of Falun
Gong practice. In Zhuan Falun (ËΩâÊ≥ïËº™), the foundational text published in
1995, Li Hongzhi writes "It doesn't matter how mankind's moral standard
changes‚Ä¶The nature of the cosmos doesn't change, and it is the only standard
for determining who's good and who's bad. So to be a cultivator you have to
take the nature of the cosmos as your guide for improving yourself.‚Äù Practice
of Falun Gong consists of two features: performance of the exercises, and the
refinement of one‚Äôs xinxing (moral character, or temperament). In Falun
Gong's central text, Li states that xinxing "includes virtue (which is a type
of matter), it includes forbearance, it includes awakening to things, it
includes giving up things‚Äîgiving up all the desires and all the attachments
that are found in an ordinary person‚Äîand you also have to endure hardship, to
name just a few things." The elevation of one's moral character, is achieved,
on the one hand, by aligning one's life with truth, compassion, and tolerance;
and on the other, by abandoning desires and "negative thoughts and behaviors,
such as greed, profit, lust, desire, killing, fighting, theft, robbery,
deception, jealousy, etc." Among the central concepts found in the teachings of
Falun Gong is the existence of 'Virtue' ('Âæ∑, "D√©") and 'Karma' ("Ye"). The
former is generated through doing good deeds and suffering, while the latter is
accumulated through doing wrong deeds. A person's ratio of karma or virtue is
said to determine his or her fortunes in this life or the next; while virtue
engenders good fortune and enables spiritual transformation, an accumulation of
karma results in suffering, illness, and alienation from the nature of the
universe. Spiritual elevation is achieved through the elimination of negative
karma and the accumulation of virtue. Falun Gong's teachings posit that human
beings are originally and innately good‚Äîeven divine‚Äîbut that they descended
into a realm of delusion and suffering after developing selfishness and
accruing karma. In order to re-ascend and return to the "original, true self",
practitioners of Falun Gong are therefore supposed to assimilate themselves to
the qualities of truthfulness, compassion and tolerance, let go of "attachments
and desires" and suffer to repay karma. The ultimate goal of the practice is
enlightenment or spiritual perfection ("yuanman"), and release from the cycle
of reincarnation, known in Buddhist tradition as "samsara". Traditional Chinese
cultural thought and modernity are two focuses of Li Hongzhi's teachings. Falun
Gong echoes traditional Chinese beliefs that humans are connected to the
universe through mind and body, and Li seeks to challenge "conventional
mentalities", concerning the nature and genesis of the universe, time-space,
and the human body. The practice draws on East Asian mysticism and traditional
Chinese medicine, criticizes the purportedly self-imposed limits of modern
science, and views traditional Chinese science as an entirely different, yet
equally valid ontological system. Exercises. In addition to its moral
philosophy, Falun Gong consists of four standing exercises and one sitting
meditation. The exercises are regarded as secondary to moral elevation, though
is still an essential component of Falun Gong cultivation practice. The first
exercises, called "Buddha Stretching a Thousand Arms", are intended to
facilitate the free flow of energy through the body and open up the meridians.
The second exercise, "Falun Standing Stance", involves holding four static
poses‚Äîeach of which resembles holding a wheel‚Äîfor an extended period. The
objective of this exercise is to "enhances wisdom, increases strength, raises a
person‚Äôs level, and strengthens divine powers". The third, "Coursing between
the Two Poles", involves three sets of movements which aim to enable the
expulsion of bad energy (e.g. pathogenic or black qi) and the absorption of
good energy into the body. Through practice of this exercise, the practitioner
aspires to cleanse and purify the body. The fourth exercise, "Falun Cosmic
Orbit", seeks to circulate energy freely throughout the body. Unlike the first
through fourth exercises, the fifth exercise is performed in the seated lotus
position. Called "Reinforcing Supernatural Powers", it is a meditation intended
to be maintained as long as possible. Some of its postures correspond to the
traditional meditative gestures of Buddhism, and is described by Li as more
advanced than the previous four. Falun Gong exercises can be practiced
individually or in group settings, and can be performed for varying lengths of
time in accordance with the needs and abilities of the individual practitioner.
Porter writes that practitioners of Falun Gong are encouraged to read Falun
Gong books and practice its exercises on a regular basis, preferably daily.
Falun Gong exercises are practiced in group settings in parks, university
campuses, and other public spaces in 70 countries worldwide, and are taught for
free by volunteers. In addition to five exercises, in 2001 another meditation
activity was introduced called "sending righteous thoughts," which is intended
to reduce persecution on the spiritual plane. Social practices. Falun Gong
differentiates itself from Buddhist monastic traditions in that it places great
importance on participation in the secular world. Falun Gong adherents are
required to maintain regular jobs and family lives, to observe the laws of
their respective governments, and are instructed not to distance themselves
from society. An exemption is made for Buddhist monks and nuns, who are
permitted to continue a monastic lifestyle while practicing Falun Gong. As part
of its emphasis on ethical behavior, Falun Gong's teachings prescribe a strict
personal morality for practitioners, which includes abstention from smoking,
drugs, gambling, premarital or extramarital sex, and homosexuality. These
behaviors are said to generate negative karma, and are therefore viewed as
counterproductive to the goals of the practice. Practitioners of Falun Gong are
forbidden to kill living things‚Äîincluding animals for the purpose of
obtaining food‚Äîthough it does not require the adoption of a vegetarian diet.
The practice teaches against the consumption of alcohol on the basis that it is
a potentially addictive attachment that can interfere with the cultivation of
the body and lead to "irrationality". Falun Gong doctrine also counsels against
participation in political or social issues. Excessive interest in politics is
viewed as an attachment to worldly power and influence, and Falun Gong aims for
transcendence of such pursuits. According to Hu Ping, "Falun Gong deals only
with purifying the individual through exercise, and does not touch on social or
national concerns. It has not suggested or even intimated a model for social
change. Many religions ... pursue social reform to some extent ... but there is
no such tendency evident in Falun Gong." Texts. The first book of Falun Gong
teachings was published in April 1993. Called "China Falun Gong", or simply
"Falun Gong", is an introductory text that discusses "qigong", Falun Gong's
relationship to Buddhism, the principles of cultivation practice and the
improvement of moral character (xinxing). The book also and provides
illustrations and explanations of the exercises and meditation. The main body
of teachings is articulated in the core book "Zhuan Falun", published in
Chinese in January 1995. The book is divided into nine "lectures", and was
based on edited transcriptions of the talks Li gave throughout China in the
preceding three years. Falun Gong texts have since been translated into an
additional 38 languages. In addition to these central texts, Li has published
several books, lectures, articles, books of poetry, which are made available on
Falun Gong websites. The Falun Gong teachings use numerous untranslated Chinese
religious and philosophical terms, and make frequent allusion to characters and
incidents in Chinese folk literature and concepts drawn from Chinese popular
religion. This, coupled with the literal translation style of the texts, which
imitate the colloquial style of Li‚Äôs speeches, can make Falun Gong scriptures
difficult to approach for Westerners. Symbols. The main symbol of the practice
is the "Falun" (Dharma wheel, or "Dharmacakra" in Sanskrit). In Buddhism, the
Dharmacakra represents the completeness of the doctrine. To "turn the wheel of
dharma" ("Zhuan Falun") means to preach the Buddhist doctrine, and is the title
of Falun Gong's main text. Despite the invocation of Buddhist language and
symbols, the law wheel as understood in Falun Gong has distinct connotations,
and is held to represent the universe. It is conceptualized by an emblem
consisting of one large and four small Swastika symbols, representing the
Buddha, and four small Taiji (yin-yang) symbols of the Daoist tradition.
Categorization. Falun Gong is a multifaceted discipline that means different
things to different people, ranging from a set of physical exercises for the
attainment of better health and a praxis of self-transformation, to a moral
philosophy and a new knowledge system. Scholars and journalists have adopted a
variety of terms and classifications in describing Falun Gong, some of them
more precise than others. In the cultural context of China, Falun Gong is
generally described either as a system of qigong, or a type of "cultivation
practice" ("xiulian"). Cultivation is a Chinese term that describes the process
by which an individual seeks spiritual perfection, often through both physical
and moral conditioning. Varieties of cultivation practice are found throughout
Chinese history, spanning Buddhist, Daoist and Confucian traditions. Benjamin
Penny, a professor of Chinese history at the Australian National University,
writes "the best way to describe Falun Gong is as a cultivation system.
Cultivation systems have been a feature of Chinese life for at least 2,500
years." Qigong practices can also be understood as a part of a broader
tradition of "cultivation practice". In the West, Falun Gong is frequently
classified as a religion on the basis of its theological and moral teachings,
its concerns with spiritual cultivation and transformation, and its extensive
body of scripture. Human rights groups report on the suppression of Falun Gong
as a violation of religious freedom, and in 2001, Falun Gong was given an
International Religious Freedom Award from Freedom House. Falun Gong
practitioners themselves have sometimes disavowed this classification, however.
This rejection reflects the relatively narrow definition of "religion"
("zongjiao") in contemporary China. According to David Ownby, religion in China
has been defined since 1912 to refer to "world-historical faiths" that have
"well-developed institutions, clergy, and textual traditions"‚Äînamely,
Buddhism, Daoism, Islam, Protestantism and Catholicism. Falun Gong lacks these
features, having no temples, rituals of worship, clergy or formal hierarchy.
Moreover, if Falun Gong had described itself as a religion in China, it likely
would have invited immediate suppression. These historical and cultural
circumstances notwithstanding, the practice has often been described as a form
of Chinese religion. Although it is often referred to as such in journalistic
literature, Falun Gong does not satisfy the definition of a "sect." A sect is
generally defined as a branch or denomination of an established belief system
or mainstream church. Although Falun Gong draws on both Buddhist and Daoist
ideas and terminology, it claims no direct relationship or lineage connection
to these religions. Sociologists regard sects as exclusive groups that exist
within clearly defined boundaries, with rigorous standards for admission and
strict allegiances. However, as noted by Noah Porter, Falun Gong does not share
these qualities: it does not have clearly defined boundaries, and anyone may
practice it. Cheris Shun-ching considers cults to be new religious movements
that focus on the individual experience of the encounter with the sacred rather
than collective worship, and to that end describes Falun Gong as a new
religious movement ‚Äúwith cult-like characteristics." However, Chan defines a
"cult" differently than as the term is usually understood; she calls it a group
that does not have a "prior theological tie with an established religious
body," that holds "beliefs and practice are very often mystically and
individualistically oriented," and which is "loosely structured with a
Ô¨Çuctuating membership and tolerant of other organizations and faiths." Some
scholars avoid the term "cult" altogether because "of the confusion between the
historic meaning of the term and current pejorative use." These scholars prefer
terms like "spiritual movement", "new religious syncretism", or "new religious
movement" to avoid the negative connotations of "cult" or to avoid improperly
categorizing those which do not fit mainstream definitions. Organization. As a
matter of doctrinal significance, Falun Gong is intended to be "formless",
having little to no material or formal organization. Practitioners of Falun
Gong cannot collect money or charge fees, conduct healings, or teach or
interpret doctrine for others. There are no administrators or officials within
the practice, no system of membership, and no churches or physical places of
worship. In the absence of membership or initiation rituals, Falun Gong
practitioners can be anyone who chooses to identify themselves as such.
Students are free to participate in the practice and follow its teachings as
much or as little as they like, and practitioners do not instruct others on
what to believe or how to behave. Falun Gong is centralized in that spiritual
authority is vested in the corpus of teachings of the founder, Li Hongzhi, but
organizationally it is decentralized with local branches and assistants
afforded no special privileges, authority, or titles. Volunteer "assistants" or
"contact persons" do not hold authority over other practitioners, regardless of
how long they have practiced Falun Gong. As such, spiritual and ideological
authority in the practice is completely centralized with Li Hongzhi. Li's
spiritual authority within the practice is absolute, yet the organization of
Falun Gong works against totalistic control, and Li does not intervene in the
personal lives of adherents. Practitioners of Falun Gong have little to no
contact with Li, except through the study of his teachings. There is no
hierarchy in Falun Gong to enforce orthodoxy, and little or no emphasis is
given on dogmatic discipline; the only thing emphasized is the need for strict
moral behavior, according to Craig Burgdoff, a professor of religious studies.
To the extent that organization is achieved in Falun Gong, it is accomplished
through a global, networked, and largely virtual online community. In
particular, electronic communications, email lists and a collection of websites
are the primary means of coordinating activities and disseminating Li Hongzhi's
teachings. The extent of Falun Gong's reliance on the internet as a means of
organizing has led to the group's characterization as "a virtual religious
community." Outside Mainland China, a network of volunteer 'contact persons',
regional Falun Dafa Associations and university clubs exist in approximately 70
countries. Li Hongzhi's teachings are principally spread through the Internet.
In most mid- to large-sized cities, Falun Gong practitioners organize regular
group meditation or study sessions in which they practice Falun Gong exercises
and read Li Hongzhi's writings. The exercise and meditation sessions are
described as informal groups of practitioners who gather in public
parks‚Äîusually in the morning‚Äîfor one to two hours. Group study sessions
typically take place in the evenings in private residences or university or
high school classrooms, and are described by David Ownby as "the closest thing
to a regular 'congregational experience'" that Falun Gong offers. Individuals
who are too busy, isolated, or who simply prefer solitude may elect to practice
privately. When there are expenses to be covered (such as for the rental of
facilities for large-scale conferences), costs are borne by self-nominated and
relatively affluent individual members of the community. Organization within
China. In 1993, the Beijing-based Falun Dafa Research Society was accepted as a
branch of the state-run China Qigong Research Society (CQRS), which oversaw the
administration of the country's various qigong schools, and sponsored
activities and seminars. As per the requirements of the CQRS, Falun Gong was
organized into a nationwide network of assistance centers, "main stations",
"branches", "guidance stations", and local practice sites, mirroring the
structure of the qigong society or even of the Communist Party itself. Falun
Gong assistants were self-selecting volunteers who taught the exercises,
organized events, and disseminated new writings from Li Hongzhi. The Falun Dafa
Research Society provided advice to students on meditation techniques,
translation services, and coordination for the practice nationwide. Following
its departure from the CQRS in 1996, Falun Gong came under increased scrutiny
from authorities and responded by adopting a more decentralized and loose
organizational structure. In 1997, the Falun Dafa Research Society was formally
dissolved, along with the regional "main stations." Yet practitioners continued
to organize themselves at local levels, being connected through electronic
communications, interpersonal networks and group exercise sites. Both Falun
Gong sources and Chinese government sources claimed that there were some 1,900
"guidance stations" and 28,263 local Falun Gong exercise sites nationwide by
1999, though they disagree over the extent of vertical coordination among these
organizational units. In response to the suppression that began in 1999, Falun
Gong was driven underground, the organizational structure grew yet more
informal within China, and the internet took precedence as a means of
connecting practitioners. Following the suppression of Falun Gong in 1999,
Chinese authorities sought to portray Falun Gong as a hierarchical and well-
funded organization. James Tong writes that it was in the government's interest
to portray Falun Gong as highly organized in order to justify its repression of
the group: "The more organized the Falun Gong could be shown to be, then the
more justified the regime's repression in the name of social order was." He
concluded that Party's claims lacked "both internal and external substantiating
evidence", and that despite the arrests and scrutiny, the authorities never
"credibly countered Falun Gong rebuttals". Demography. Prior to July 1999,
official estimates placed the number of Falun Gong practitioners as high as 60
to 70 million nationwide, rivaling membership in the Communist Party. By the
time of the suppression on 22 July 1999, most Chinese government numbers said
the population of Falun Gong was between 2 and 3 million, though some
publications maintained an estimate of 40 million. Most Falun Gong estimates in
the same period placed the total number of practitioners in China at 70 to 80
million. Other sources have estimated the Falun Gong population in China to
have peaked between 10 and 60 million practitioners. The number of Falun Gong
adherents still practicing in China today is difficult to confirm, though some
sources estimate that millions may continue to practice privately. Demographic
surveys conducted in China in 1998 found a population that was mostly female
and elderly. Of 34,351 Falun Gong practitioners surveyed, 27% were male and 73%
female. Only 38% were under 50 years old. Falun Gong attracted a range of other
individuals, from young college students to bureaucrats, intellectuals and
Party officials. Surveys in China from the 1990s found that between 23% - 40%
of practitioners held university degrees at the college or graduate
level‚Äîseveral times higher than the general population. Falun Gong is
practiced by tens, and possibly hundreds of thousands outside China, with the
largest communities found in Taiwan and North American cities with large
Chinese populations, such as New York and Toronto. Demographic surveys by
Palmer and Ownby in these communities found that 90% of practitioners are
ethnic Chinese. The average age was approximately 40. Among survey respondents,
56% were female and 44% male; 80% were married. The surveys found the
respondents to be highly educated: 9% held PhDs, 34% had Masters degrees, and
24% had a Bachelors degree. The most commonly reported reasons for being
attracted to Falun Gong were intellectual content, cultivation exercises, and
health benefits. Non-Chinese adherents of Falun Gong tend to fit the profile of
"spiritual seekers"‚Äîpeople who had tried a variety of qigong, yoga, or
religious practices before finding Falun Gong. According to Richard Madsen,
Chinese scientists with doctorates from prestigious American universities who
practice Falun Gong claim that modern physics (for example, superstring theory)
and biology (specifically the pineal gland's function) provide a scientific
basis for their beliefs. From their point of view, "Falun Dafa is knowledge
rather than religion, a new form of science rather than faith." History inside
China. 1992‚Äì1996. Li Hongzhi introduced Falun Gong to the public in 13 May
1992, in Changchun, Jilin Province. Several months later, in September 1992,
Falun Gong was admitted as a branch of qigong under the administration of the
state-run China Qigong Scientific Research Society (CQRS). Li was recognized as
a qigong master, and was authorized to teach his practice nationwide. Like many
"qigong" masters at the time, Li toured major cities in China from 1992 to 1994
to teach the practice. He was granted a number of awards by PRC governmental
organizations. According to David Ownby, Professor of History and Director of
the Center for East Asian Studies at the Universit√© de Montr√©al, Li became an
"instant star of the qigong movement", and Falun Gong was embraced by the
government as an effective means of lowering health care costs, promoting
Chinese culture, and improving public morality. In December 1992, for instance,
Li and several Falun Gong students participated in the Asian Health Expo in
Beijing, where he reportedly ‚Äúreceived the most praise any qigong school at
the fair, and achieved very good therapeutic results,‚Äù according to the
fair‚Äôs organizer The event helped cement Li‚Äôs popularity, and journalistic
reports of Falun Gong‚Äôs healing powers spread. In 1993, a publication of the
Ministry of Public Security praised Li for "promoting the traditional crime-
fighting virtues of the Chinese people, in safeguarding social order and
security, and in promoting rectitude in society." Falun Gong had differentiated
itself from other "qigong" groups in its emphasis on morality, low cost, and
health benefits. It rapidly spread via word-of-mouth, attracting a wide range
of adherents from all walks of life, including numerous members of the Chinese
Communist Party. Li charged less than competing "qigong" systems for lectures,
tapes, and books, and in 1994 had altogether stopped collecting fees for his
lectures. With the publication of the books "Falun Gong" and "Zhuan Falun", Li
made his teachings more widely accessible. "Zhuan Falun", published in January
1995 at an unveiling ceremony held in the auditorium of the Ministry of Public
Security, became a best-seller in China. In 1995, Chinese authorities began
looking to Falun Gong to solidify its organizational structure and ties to the
party-state. Li was approached by the Chinese National Sports Committee,
Ministry of Public Health, and China Qigong Science Research Association (CQRS)
to jointly establish a Falun Gong association. Li declined the offer. The same
year, the CQRS issued a new regulation mandating that all qigong denominations
establish a Communist Party branch. Li again refused. Tensions continued to
mount between Li and the CQRS in 1996. In the face of Falun Gong's rise in
popularity‚Äîa large part of which was attributed to its low cost‚Äîcompeting
"qigong" masters accused Li of undercutting them. According to Schechter, the
"qigong" society under which Li and other "qigong" masters belonged asked Li to
hike his tuition, but Li emphasized the need for the teachings to be free of
charge. In March 1996, in response to mounting disagreements, Falun Gong
withdrew from the Qigong Association, after which time it operated outside the
official sanction of the state. Falun Gong representatives attempted to
register with other government entities, but were rebuffed. Li and Falun Gong
were then outside the circuit of personal relations and financial exchanges
through which masters and their "qigong" organizations could find a place
within the state system, and also the protections this afforded. 1996‚Äì1999.
Falun Gong‚Äôs departure from the state-run Qigong Association corresponded to
a wider shift in the government‚Äôs attitudes towards qigong practices. As
qigong‚Äôs detractors in government grew more influential, authorities began
attempting to rein in the growth and influence of these groups, some of which
had amassed tens of millions of followers. In the mid-1990s the state-run media
began publishing articles critical of qigong. Falun Gong was initially shielded
from the mounting criticism, but following its withdrawal from the CQRS in
March 1996, it lost this protection. On 17 June 1996, the "Guangming Daily", an
influential state-run newspaper, published a polemic against Falun Gong in
which its central text, "Zhuan Falun", was described as an example of "feudal
superstition." The author wrote that the history of humanity is a "struggle
between science and superstition," and called on Chinese publishers not to
print "pseudo-scientific books of the swindlers." Until this juncture, Falun
Gong had successfully negotiated the space between science and native tradition
in the public representation of its teachings, avoiding any suggestion of
superstition. The article was followed by at least twenty more in newspapers
nationwide. Soon after, on 24 July, the Central Propaganda Department banned
all publication of Falun Gong books (though the ban was not consistently
enforced). The state-administered Buddhist Association of China also began
issuing criticisms of Falun Gong, urging lay Buddhists not to take up the
practice. The events were an important challenge to Falun Gong, and one that
practitioners did not take lightly. Thousands of Falun Gong followers wrote to
"Guangming Daily" and to the CQRS to complain against the measures, claiming
that they violated Hu Yaobang's 1982 'Triple No' directive which prohibited the
media from either encouraging or criticizing qigong practices. In other
instances, Falun Gong adherents staged peaceful demonstrations outside media or
local government offices to request retractions of perceived unfair coverage.
Li Hongzhi made statements that practitioners' response to criticism showed
their hearts and "would separate the false disciples from the true ones", also
indicating that publicly defending the practice was a righteous act and an
important aspect of Falun Gong cultivation. The polemics against Falun Gong
were part of a larger movement opposing qigong organizations in the state-run
media. Although Falun Gong was not the only target of the media criticism, nor
the only group to protest, theirs was the most mobilized and steadfast
response. Many of Falun Gong's protests against negative media portrayals were
successful, resulting in the retraction of several newspaper stories critical
of the practice. This contributed to practitioners' belief that the media
claims against them were false or exaggerated, and that their stance was
justified. In June 1998, Tianjin professor He Zuoxiu, an outspoken critic of
qigong and member of the Communist Party‚Äôs consultative conference, appeared
on a talk show on Beijing Television and openly disparaged "qigong" groups,
making particular mention of Falun Gong. Falun Gong practitioners responded
with peaceful protests and by lobbying the station for a retraction. The
reporter responsible for the program was reportedly fired, and a program
favorable to Falun Gong was aired several days later. Falun Gong practitioners
also mounted demonstrations at 14 other media outlets. In 1997, The Ministry of
Public Security launched an investigation into whether Falun Gong should be
deemed xie jiao (ÈÇ™Êïô, "heretical teaching"). The report concluded that "no
evidence has appeared thus far". The following year, however, on 21 July 1998,
the Ministry of Public Security issued Document No. 555, "Notice of the
Investigation of Falun Gong". The document asserted that Falun Gong is a
"heretical teaching", and mandated that another investigation be launched to
seek evidence in support of the conclusion. Falun Gong practitioners reported
having phone lines tapped, homes ransacked and raided, and Falun Gong exercise
sites disrupted by public security agents. In this time period, even as
criticism of qigong and Falun Gong mounted in some circles, the practice
maintained a number of high-profile supporters in the government. In 1998, Qiao
Shi, the recently retired Chairman of the Standing Committee of the National
People's Congress, initiated his own investigation into Falun Gong. After
months of investigations, his group concluded that "Falun Gong has hundreds of
benefits for the Chinese people and China, and does not have one single bad
effect." In May of the same year, China's National Sports Commission launched
its own survey of Falun Gong. Based on interviews with over 12,000 Falun Gong
adherents in Guangdong province, they stated that they were "convinced the
exercises and effects of Falun Gong are excellent. It has done an extraordinary
amount to improve society's stability and ethics." The practice‚Äôs founder, Li
Hongzhi, was largely absent from the country during the period of rising
tensions with the government. Li had left China to teach his practice abroad in
1996, and in 1998 obtained permanent residency in the United States. By 1999,
estimates provided by the State Sports Commission suggested there were 60 to 70
millions Falun Gong practitioners in China. Wu Shaozu, an official from China's
National Sports Commission, was at this time quoted in an interview with U.S.
News & World Report that as many as 100 million may have taken up Falun Gong
and other forms of qigong. Wu noted that the popularity of these practices
dramatically reduced health care costs, and that "Premier Zhu Rongji is very
happy about that." Tianjin and Zhongnanhai protests. By the late 1990s, the
Communist Party's relationship to the growing Falun Gong movement had become
increasingly tense. Reports of discrimination and surveillance by the Public
Security Bureau were escalating, and Falun Gong adherents were routinely
organizing sit-in demonstrations responding to media articles they deemed to be
unfair. The conflicting investigations launched by the Ministry of the Public
Security on one side and the State Sports Commission and Qiao Shi on the other
spoke of the disagreements among China's elites on how to regard the growing
practice. In April 1999, an article critical of Falun Gong was published in
Tianjin Normal University's "Youth Reader" magazine. The article was authored
by physicist He Zuoxiu who, as Porter and Gutmann note, is a relative of
Politburo member and public security tsar Luo Gan. The article cast qigong, and
Falun Gong in particular, as superstitious and harmful for youth. Falun Gong
practitioners responded by picketing the offices of the newspaper requesting a
retraction of the article. Unlike past instances in which Falun Gong protests
were successful, on 22 April the Tianjin demonstration was broken up by the
arrival of three hundred riot police. Some of the practitioners were beaten,
and forty-five arrested. Other Falun Gong practitioners were told that if they
wished to appeal further, they needed to take the issue up with the Ministry of
Public Security and go to Beijing to appeal The Falun Gong community quickly
mobilized a response, and on the morning of 25 April, upwards of 10,000
practitioners gathered near the central appeals office to demand an end to the
escalating harassment against the movement, and request the release of the
Tianjin practitioners. According to Benjamin Penny, practitioners sought
redress from the leadership of the country by going to them and, "albeit very
quietly and politely, making it clear that they would not be treated so
shabbily." Journalist Ethan Gutmann wrote that security officers had been
expecting them, and corralled the practitioners onto Fuyou Street in front of
Zhongnanhai government compound. They sat or read quietly on the sidewalks
surrounding the Zhongnanhai. Five Falun Gong representatives met with Premier
Zhu Rongji and other senior officials to negotiate a resolution. The Falun Gong
representatives were assured that the regime supported physical exercises for
health improvements and did not consider the Falun Gong to be anti-government.
Upon reaching this resolution, the crowd of Falun Gong protesters dispersed.
President Jiang Zemin was alerted to the demonstration by Politburo member Luo
Gan, and was reportedly angered by the audacity of the demonstration‚Äîthe
largest since the Tiananmen Square protests ten years earlier. Jiang called for
resolute action to suppress the group, and reportedly criticized Premier Zhu
for being "too soft" in his handling of the situation. That evening, Jiang
composed a letter indicating his desire to see Falun Gong "defeated". In the
letter, Jiang expressed concerns over the size and popularity of Falun Gong,
and in particular about the large number of senior Communist Party members
found among Falun Gong adherents. He also intimated that Falun Gong's moral
philosophy was at odds with the atheist values of Marxist-Leninism, and
therefore constituted a form of ideological competition. Jiang is held by Falun
Gong to be personally responsible for this decision to suppress Falun Gong.
Peerman cited reasons such as suspected personal jealousy of Li Hongzhi; Saich
points to Jiang's anger at Falun Gong's widespread appeal, and ideological
struggle as causes for the crackdown that followed. Willy Wo-Lap Lam suggests
Jiang's decision to suppress Falun Gong was related to a desire to consolidate
his power within the Politburo. According to Human Rights Watch, Communist
Party leaders and ruling elite were far from unified in their support for the
crackdown. Suppression. On 20 July 1999, security forces abducted and detained
thousands of Falun Gong adherents that they identified as leaders. Two days
later on 22 July, the PRC Ministry of Civil Affairs outlawed the Falun Dafa
Research Society as an illegal organization "engaged in illegal activities,
advocating superstition and spreading fallacies, hoodwinking people, inciting
and creating disturbances, and jeopardizing social stability", and the Ministry
of Public Security issued a circular forbidding citizens from practicing Falun
Gong in groups, possessing Falun Gong's teachings, displaying Falun Gong
banners or symbols, or protesting the ban. The ensuing campaign aimed to
"eradicate" the group through a combination of propaganda, imprisonment, and
coercive thought reform of adherents, sometimes resulting in deaths. In October
1999, four months after the ban, legislation was created to outlaw "heterodox
religions," and applied to sentence Falun Gong devotees to prison terms.
Hundreds of thousands are believed to have been imprisoned extrajudicially, and
practitioners in detention are reportedly subjected to forced labor,
psychiatric abuse, torture, and other coercive methods of thought reform at the
hands of Chinese authorities. The U.S. Department of State and Congressional-
Executive Commission on China cite estimates that as much as half of China's
reeducation-through-labor camp population is made up of Falun Gong adherents.
Researcher Ethan Gutmann estimates that Falun Gong represents an average of 15
to 20 percent of the total "laogai" population. Former detainees of the labor
camp system have reported that Falun Gong practitioners are one of the largest
groups of prisoners; in some labor camp and prison facilities, they comprise
the majority of detainees, and are often said to receive the longest sentences
and the worst treatment. According to Johnson, the campaign against Falun Gong
extends to many aspects of society, including the media apparatus, police
force, military, education system, and workplaces. An extra-constitutional
body, the "610 Office" was created to "oversee" the effort. Human Rights Watch
(2002) noted that families and workplaces were urged to cooperate with the
government. In February 2001, in an attempt to show unity, the Communist Party
held a Central Work Conference and discussed Falun Gong. Under Jiang's
leadership, the crackdown on Falun Gong became part of the Chinese political
ethos of "upholding stability" ‚Äì much the same rhetoric employed by the party
during Tiananmen in 1989. Jiang's message was echoed at the 2001 National
People's Congress, where Premier Zhu Rongji made special mention of Falun Gong
in his outline of the PRC Tenth Five-Year Plan, saying "we must continue our
campaign against the Falun Gong cult", effectively tying Falun Gong's
eradication to China's economic progress. Though less prominent on the national
agenda, the suppression against Falun Gong has carried on during the tenure of
Hu Jintao; successive, high-level "strike hard" campaigns against Falun Gong
were initiated in both 2008 and 2009. In 2010, a three-year campaign was
launched to renew attempts at the coercive "transformation" of Falun Gong
adherents. Speculation on rationale. Foreign observers have attempted to
explain the Party's rationale for banning Falun Gong as stemming from a variety
of factors. These include Falun Gong's popularity, China‚Äôs history of quasi-
religious movements which turned into violent insurrections, its independence
from the state and refusal to toe the Party line, internal power politics
within the Communist Party, and Falun Gong's moral and spiritual content, which
put it at odds with the atheist aspects of the official Marxist ideology.
Xinhua News Agency, the official news organization of the Communist Party,
declared that Falun Gong is "opposed to the Communist Party of China and the
central government, preaches idealism, theism and feudal superstition." Xinhua
also asserted that "the so-called 'truth, kindness and forbearance' principle
preached by Li has nothing in common with the socialist ethical and cultural
progress we are striving to achieve", and argued that it was necessary to crush
Falun Gong in order to preserve the "vanguard role and purity" of the Communist
Party. Other articles appearing in the state-run media in the first days and
weeks of the ban posited that Falun Gong must be defeated because its
"theistic" philosophy was at odds with the Marxist-Leninism paradigm and with
the secular values of materialism. Willy Wo-Lap Lam writes that president Jiang
Zemin's campaign against Falun Gong may have been used to promote allegiance to
himself; Lam quotes one party veteran as saying "by unleashing a Mao-style
movement Falun Gong, Jiang is forcing senior cadres to pledge allegiance to his
line." "The Washington Post" reported that sources indicated not all of the
standing committee of the Politburo shared Jiang's view that Falun Gong should
be eradicated, but James Tong suggests there was not substantial resistance
from the Politburo. Human Rights Watch notes that the crackdown on Falun Gong
reflects historical efforts by the Chinese Communist Party to eradicate
religion, which the government believes is inherently subversive. The Chinese
government protects five "patriotic", Communist Party-sanctioned religious
groups. Unregistered religions that fall outside the state-sanctioned
organizations are thus vulnerable to suppression. "The Globe and Mail" wrote :
"...any group that does not come under the control of the Party is a threat"
Craig S. Smith of "The Wall Street Journal" suggests that the government which
has by definition no view of spirituality, lacks moral credibility with which
to fight an expressly spiritual foe; the party feels increasingly threatened by
any belief system that challenges its ideology and has an ability to organize
itself. That Falun Gong, whose belief system represented a revival of
traditional Chinese religion, was being practiced by a large number of
Communist Party members and members of the military was seen as particularly
disturbing to Jiang Zemin; according to Julia Ching, "Jiang accepts the threat
of Falun Gong as an ideological one: spiritual beliefs against militant atheism
and historical materialism. He to purge the government and the military of such
beliefs.‚Äù Yuezhi Zhao argues that a number of factors contributed to the
souring of relations between Falun Gong and the Chinese state and media. These
included infighting between China's qigong establishment and Falun Gong,
speculation over blackmailing and lobbying by qigong opponents and "scientists-
cum-ideologues with political motives and affiliations with competing central
Party leaders", which caused the shift in the state's position, and the
struggles from mid-1996 to mid-1999 between Falun Gong and the Chinese power
elite over the status and treatment of the movement. According to Zhao, Falun
Gong practitioners have established a "resistance identity"‚Äîone that stands
against prevailing pursuits of wealth, power, scientific rationality, and "the
entire value system associated with China's project of modernization." In China
the practice represented an indigenous spiritual and moral tradition, a
cultural revitalization movement, and drew a sharp contrast to "Marxism with
Chinese characteristics". Vivienne Shue similarly writes that Falun Gong
presented a comprehensive challenge to the Communist Party's legitimacy. Shue
argues that Chinese rulers historically have derived their legitimacy from a
claim to possess an exclusive connection to the "Truth". In imperial China,
truth was based on a Confucian and Daoist cosmology, where in the case of the
Communist Party, the truth is represented by Marxist-Leninism and historical
materialism. Falun Gong challenged the Marxist-Leninism paradigm, reviving an
understanding based on more traditionally Buddhist or Daoist conceptions. David
Ownby contends that Falun Gong also challenged the Communist Party's hegemony
over Chinese nationalist discourse: "Gong's evocation of a different vision of
Chinese tradition and its contemporary value is now so threatening to the state
and party because it denies them the sole right to define the meaning of
Chinese nationalism, and perhaps of Chineseness." Maria Chang noted that since
the overthrow of the Qin Dynasty, "millenarian movements had exerted a profound
impact on the course of Chinese history", cumulating in the Chinese Revolutions
of 1949 which brought the Chinese Communists to power. Patsy Rahn (2002)
describes a paradigm of conflict between Chinese sectarian groups and the
rulers they often challenge. According to Rahn, the history of this paradigm
goes back to the collapse of the Han dynasty: "The pattern of ruling power
keeping a watchful eye on sectarian groups, at times threatened by them, at
times raising campaigns against them, began as early as the second century and
continued throughout the dynastic period, through the Mao era and into the
present." Conversion program. According to James Tong, the regime aimed at both
coercive dissolution of the Falun Gong denomination and "transformation" of the
practitioners. By 2000, the Party upped its campaign by sentencing "recidivist"
practitioners to "re-education through labor", in an effort to have them
renounce their beliefs and "transform" their thoughts. Terms were also
arbitrarily extended by police, while some practitioners had ambiguous charges
levied against them, such as "disrupting social order", "endangering national
security", or "subverting the socialist system". According to Bejesky, the
majority of long-term Falun Gong detainees are processed administratively
through this system instead of the criminal justice system. Upon completion of
their re-education sentences, those practitioners who refused to recant were
then incarcerated in "legal education centers" set up by provincial authorities
to "transform minds". Much of the conversion program relied on Mao-style
techniques of indoctrination and thought reform, where Falun Gong practitioners
were organized to view anti-Falun Gong television programs and enroll in
Marxism and materialism study sessions. Traditional Marxism and materialism
were the core content of the sessions. The government-sponsored image of the
conversion process emphasizes psychological persuasion and a variety of "soft-
sell" techniques; this is the "ideal norm" in regime reports, according to
Tong. Falun Gong reports, on the other hand, depict "disturbing and sinister"
forms of coercion against practitioners who fail to renounce their beliefs.
14,474 cases are classified by different methods of torture, according to Tong
(Falun Gong agencies document over 63,000 individual cases of torture). Among
them are cases of severe beatings; psychological torment, corporal punishment
and forced intense, heavy-burden hard labor and stress positions; solitary
confinement in squalid conditions; "heat treatment" including burning and
freezing; electric shocks delivered to sensitive parts of the body that may
result in nausea, convulsions, or fainting; "devastative" forced feeding;
sticking bamboo strips into fingernails; deprivation of food, sleep, and use of
toilet; rape and gang rape; asphyxiation; and threat, extortion, and
termination of employment and student status. The cases appear verifiable, and
the great majority identify (1) the individual practitioner, often with age,
occupation, and residence; (2) the time and location that the alleged abuse
took place, down to the level of the district, township, village, and often the
specific jail institution; and (3) the names and ranks of the alleged
perpetrators. Many such reports include lists of the names of witnesses and
descriptions of injuries, Tong says. The publication of "persistent abusive,
often brutal behavior by named individuals with their official title, place,
and time of torture" suggests that there is no official will to cease and
desist such activities. Deaths. Due to the difficulty in corroborating reports
of torture deaths in China, estimates on the number of Falun Gong adherents
killed under persecution vary widely. In 2009, the New York Times reported
that, according to human rights groups, the repressions had claimed "at least
2,000" lives. Amnesty International reported that at least 100 Falun Gong
practitioners were believed to have been killed in the 2008 calendar year,
either in custody or shortly after their release. Falun Gong sources have
reported approximately 3,400 deaths. Journalist Ethan Gutmann of the Foundation
for Defense of Democracies produced a median estimated death toll of 65,000
based on a refugee testimony, while researchers David Kilgour and David Matas
produced an estimate of 41,500 killed from 2000 - 2005. Chinese authorities do
not publish statistics on Falun Gong adherents killed amidst the crackdown. In
individual cases, however, authorities have denied that deaths in custody were
due to torture. Alleged organ harvesting. In March 2006 the Falun Gong-
affiliated "Epoch Times" published a number of articles alleging that the China
was conducting widespread and systematic organ harvesting of living Falun Gong
practitioners. The website alleged that practitioners detained in labour camps,
hospital basements, or prisons, were being blood- and urine-tested, their
information stored on computer databases, and then matched with organ
recipients. Within one month, third-party investigators including
representatives of the US Department of State, said that there was insufficient
evidence to support the allegation. Former Canadian Secretary of State David
Kilgour and human rights lawyer David Matas were asked by the Coalition to
Investigate the Persecution of Falun Gong to investigate the allegations. In
July 2006, they published "Report into Allegations of Organ Harvesting of Falun
Gong Practitioners in China", which concluded that large numbers of Falun Gong
practitioners were victims of systematic organ harvesting throughout China.
Ethan Gutmann, adjunct fellow at the Foundation for Defense of Democracies,
approached the allegations by conducting extensive interviews around the world
with a variety of former prisoners from Chinese labor camps and prisons,
including Falun Gong practitioners and non-practitioners. He calculates that
the number of practitioners killed for organs could be as high as 120,000, with
a low estimate of 9,000, and 65,000 being the median. Estimates have been
revised downwards from earlier numbers to reflect changing estimates of the
overall Laogai System population by the Laogai Research Foundation. Chinese
officials have repeatedly and firmly denied the organ harvesting allegations in
the report. Upon release of the initial report on 6 July, a spokesperson
immediately declared that China abided by World Health Organization principles
that prohibit the sale of human organs without written consent from donors.
They denounced the report as smears "based on rumours and false allegations",
and said the claims had been investigated and found to be without any merit.
However, in December 2005, China's Deputy Health Minister acknowledged that the
practice of removing organs from executed prisoners for transplant was
widespread, with as many as 95% of all organ transplants in China being sourced
from executions, and he promised steps to prevent abuse. Media campaign. The
Chinese government‚Äôs campaign against Falun Gong was driven by large-scale
propaganda through television, newspapers, radio and internet. Within the first
month of the crackdown, 300‚Äì400 articles attacking Falun Gong appeared in
each of the main state-run papers, while primetime television replayed alleged
expos√©s on the group, with no divergent views aired in the media. The
propaganda campaign focused on allegations that Falun Gong jeopardized social
stability, was deceiving and dangerous, was "anti-science" and threatened
progress, and argued that Falun Gong's moral philosophy was incompatible with a
Marxist social ethic. State propaganda initially used the appeal of scientific
rationalism to argue that Falun Gong's worldview was in "complete opposition to
science" and communism. The "People's Daily" asserted on 27 July 1999, that it
"was a struggle between theism and atheism, superstition and science, idealism
and materialism." A polarized depiction was created where the scientific
worldview represented by Marxist-Leninism was legitimized as "moral and
truthful," while the Falun Gong discourse was "evil and deceptive." In a
society where virtue is defined by scientific progress, obedience, and
unquestioning allegiance to the government, Falun Gong was juxtaposed with
Marxist-Leninist thought, depicted as scientifically incorrect, superstitious
without basis in reality, and the opposite of communism. China scholars Daniel
Wright and Joseph Fewsmith assert that for several months after Falun Gong was
outlawed, China Central Television's evening news contained little but anti-
Falun Gong rhetoric charging that it cheats its followers, separates families,
damages health, and hurts social stability. The government operation was "a
study in all-out demonization", they write. Falun Gong was compared to "a rat
crossing the street that everyone shouts out to squash" by "Beijing Daily";
other officials said it would be a "long-term, complex and serious" struggle to
"eradicate" Falun Gong. Despite Party efforts, initial charges leveled against
Falun Gong failed to elicit widespread popular support for the suppression of
the group. In the months following July 1999, the rhetoric in the state-run
press escalated to include charges that Falun Gong was colluding with foreign,
"anti-China" forces. In October 1999, three months after the suppression began,
the Supreme People's Court issued a judicial interpretation officially
classifying Falun Gong as a "xiejiao", (heretical religion, sometimes rendered
as "evil cult") under Article 300 of the criminal code. Anti-Falun Gong
propaganda activities dominated the Chinese media during that time as the
government justified its actions, arguing that Falun Gong practices were
dangerous and damaged people's physical and mental health. The CCP accused the
Falun Gong movement of causing the deaths of hundreds of adherents, arguing
that its emphasis on self-healing through meditation discourages people to seek
vital medical treatment. Additionally, the CCP said that Falun Gong caused and/
or exacerbated mental disorders, resulting in destructive behavior that led to
violence. David Ownby and Ian Johnson have argued that the Chinese state gave
the cultic appellation to Falun Gong by borrowing arguments from Margaret
Singer and the West's anti-cult movement to blunt the appeal of Falun Gong.
According to John Powers and Meg Y. M. Lee, because the Falun Gong was
categorized in the popular perception as an "apolitical, qigong exercise club,"
it was not seen as a threat to the government. The most critical strategy in
the Falun Gong suppression campaign, therefore, was to convince people to
reclassify the Falun Gong into a number of "negatively charged religious
labels", like "evil cult", "sect", or "superstition". The group's non-violent
and relatively silent protests were reclassified as creating "social
disturbances". In this process of reclassification and relabelling, the
government was attempting to tap into a "deep reservoir of negative feelings
related to the historical role of quasi-religious cults as a destabilising
force in Chinese political history." On the eve of Chinese New Year on 23
January 2001, five people attempted to set themselves ablaze on Tiananmen
Square. The official Chinese press agency, Xinhua News Agency, and other state
media asserted that the self-immolators were practitioners, though the Falun
Dafa Information Center disputed this, on the grounds that the movement's
teachings explicitly forbid suicide and killing, further alleging that the
event was a cruel but clever piece of stunt-work. The incident received
international news coverage, and video footage of the burnings were broadcast
later inside China by China Central Television (CCTV). Images of a 12 year old
girl, Liu Siying, burning and interviews with the other participants in which
they stated their belief that self-immolation would lead them to paradise were
shown. Falun Gong-related commentators pointed out that the main participants'
account of the incident and other aspects of the participants' behavior were
inconsistent with the teachings of Falun Dafa. "Washington Post" journalist
Phillip Pan wrote that the two self-immolators who died were not actually Falun
Gong practitioners. "Time" reported that prior to the self-immolation incident,
many Chinese had felt that Falun Gong posed no real threat, and that the
state's crackdown had gone too far. After the event, however, the mainland
Chinese media campaign against Falun Gong gained significant traction. As
public sympathy for Falun Gong declined, the government began sanctioning
"systematic use of violence" against the group. According to Falun Gong
websites, the number of Falun Gong adherents tortured to death rose from 245 in
2000 to 419 in 2001. Anti-Falun Gong propaganda efforts have also permeated the
Chinese education system. Following Jiang Zemin's 1999 ban of Falun Gong, then-
Minister of Education Chen Zhili launched an active campaign to promote the
Party's line on Falun Gong within all levels of academic institutions,
including graduate schools, universities and colleges, middle schools, primary
schools, and kindergartens. Her efforts included a "Cultural Revolution-like
pledge" in Chinese schools that required faculty members, staff, and students
to publicly denounce Falun Gong. Teachers who did not comply with Chen's
program were dismissed or detained; uncooperative students were refused
academic advancement, expelled from school, or sent to "transformation" camps
to alter their thinking. Chen also worked to spread the anti-Falun Gong
academic propaganda movement overseas, using domestic educational funding to
donate aid to foreign institutions, encouraging them to oppose Falun Gong.
Falun Gong's response to suppression. Falun Gong's response to the suppression
in China began in July 1999 with appeals to local, provincial and central
petitioning offices in Beijing. It soon progressed to larger demonstrations,
with hundreds of Falun Gong adherents traveling daily to Tiananmen Square to
perform Falun Gong exercises or raise banners in defense of the practice. These
demonstrations were invariably broken up by security forces, and the
practitioners involved were arrested‚Äîsometimes violently‚Äîand detained. By
25 April 2000, a total of more than 30,000 practitioners were arrested on the
square; seven hundred Falun Gong followers were arrested during a demonstration
in the square on 1 January 2001. Public protests continued well into 2001.
Writing for the "Wall Street Journal", Ian Johnson wrote that "Falun Gong
faithful have mustered what is arguably the most sustained challenge to
authority in 50 years of Communist rule." By late 2001, demonstrations in
Tiananmen Square had become less frequent, and the practice was driven deeper
underground. As public protest fell out of favor, practitioners established
underground "material sites" which would produce literature and DVDs to counter
the portrayal of Falun Gong in the official media. Practitioners then
distribute these materials, often door-to-door. Falun Gong sources estimated in
2009 that over 200,000 such sites exists across China today. The production,
possession, or distribution of these materials is frequently grounds for
security agents to incarcerate or sentence Falun Gong adherents. In 2002, Falun
Gong activists in China tapped into television broadcasts, replacing regular
state-run programming with their own content. Among the more notable instances
occurred in March 2002, when Falun Gong practitioners in Changchun intercepted
eight cable television networks in Jilin Province, and for nearly an hour,
televised a program titled "Self-Immolation or a Staged Act?". All six of the
Falun Gong practitioners involved were captured over the next few months. Two
were killed immediately, the other four were all dead by 2010 as a result of
injuries sustained while imprisoned. Outside China, Falun Gong practitioners
established international media organizations to gain wider exposure for their
cause and challenge narratives of the Chinese state-run media. These include
"The Epoch Times" newspaper, New Tang Dynasty Television, and Sound of Hope
radio station. According to Zhao, through The Epoch Times it can be discerned
how Falun Gong is building a "de facto media alliance" with China's democracy
movements in exile, as demonstrated by its frequent printing of articles by
prominent overseas Chinese critics of the PRC government. In 2004, the Epoch
Times published a collection of nine editorials which presented a critical
history of Communist Party rule. This catalyzed the Tuidang movement, which
encourages Chinese citizens to renounce their affiliations to the Chinese
Communist Party, including ex post facto renunciations of the Communist Youth
League and Young Pioneers. The Epoch Times claims that tens of millions have
renounced the Communist Party as part of the movement, though these numbers
have not been independently verified. In 2007, Falun Gong adherents in the
United States formed Shen Yun Performing Arts, a dance and music company that
tours internationally. Falun Gong software developers in the United States are
also responsible for the creation of several popular censorship-circumvention
tools employed by internet users in China. Falun Gong Practitioners outside
China have filed dozens of lawsuits against Jiang Zemin, Luo Gan, Bo Xilai, and
other Chinese officials alleging genocide and crimes against humanity.
According to "International Advocates for Justice", Falun Gong has filed the
largest number of human rights lawsuits in the 21st century and the charges are
among the most severe international crimes defined by international criminal
laws; as of 2006, 54 civil and criminal lawsuits were under way in 33. In many
instances, courts have refused to adjudicate the cases on the grounds of
sovereign immunity. In late 2009, however, separate courts in Spain and
Argentina indicted Jiang Zemin and other officials on the charge of "crimes of
humanity" and genocide, and asked for their arrest, although the ruling is
acknowledged to be largely symbolic and unlikely to be carried out. Falun Gong
practitioners and their supporters also filed a lawsuit in May 2011 against the
technology company Cisco Systems, alleging that the company helped design and
implement a surveillance system for the Chinese government to suppress Falun
Gong. Cisco denied customizing their technology for this purpose. Falun Gong
outside China. Falun Gong was first taught at the Chinese consulate in New York
in 1995 as part of the Party's "cultural propaganda to the West," alongside
Chinese silk craft and cooking. The consulate at that time also set up Falun
Gong clubs at MIT and Columbia University which are active to this day.
Starting in 1995, Li himself taught the practice outside of China, chairing a
series of conferences in Sweden and at the Chinese embassy in Paris, upon
invitation by the PRC ambassador to France. Li taught in Australia and North
America in August and October 1996, respectively. The practice's growth outside
China largely corresponded to the migration of students from Mainland China to
the West in the early- to mid-1990s, and in North America and Europe, the
practice was taught mainly on university campuses. It is organized by regional
Falun Dafa Associations and contact persons who volunteer to teach the
practice. Falun Gong volunteer instructors and Falun Dafa Associations are
currently found in over 70 countries outside China, with the most active
communities in the United States and Canada. Falun Gong adherents overseas have
responded to the suppression in China through regular demonstrations, parades,
and through the creation of media outlets, performing arts companies, and
censorship-circumvention software mainly intended to reach Mainland Chinese
audiences. International reception. Since 1999, numerous Western governments
and human rights organizations have expressed condemnation for the Chinese
government‚Äôs suppression of Falun Gong. Since 1999, members of the United
States Congress have made public pronouncements and introduced several
resolutions in support of Falun Gong. In 2010, U.S. House of Representatives
Resolution 605 called for "an immediate end to the campaign to persecute,
intimidate, imprison, and torture Falun Gong practitioners," condemned the
Chinese authorities' efforts to distribute "false propaganda" about the
practice worldwide, and expressed sympathy to persecuted Falun Gong
practitioners and their families. From 1999‚Äì2001, Western media reports on
Falun Gong‚Äîand in particular, the mistreatment of practitioners‚Äîwere
frequent, if mixed. By the latter half of 2001, however, the volume of media
reports declined precipitously, and by 2002, major news organizations like the
"New York Times" and "Washington Post" had almost completely ceased their
coverage of Falun Gong from China. In a study of media discourse on Falun Gong,
researcher Leeshai Lemish found that Western news organizations also became
less balanced, and more likely to uncritically present the narratives of the
Communist Party, rather than those of Falun Gong or human rights groups. Adam
Frank writes that in reporting on the Falun Gong, the Western tradition of
casting the Chinese as "exotic" took dominance, and that while the facts were
generally correct in Western media coverage, ‚Äúthe normalcy that millions of
Chinese practitioners associated with the practice had all but disappeared."
David Ownby noted that alongside these tactics, the "cult" label applied to
Falun Gong by the Chinese authorities never entirely went away in the minds of
some Westerners, and the stigma still plays a role in wary public perceptions
of Falun Gong. To counter the support of Falun Gong in the West, the Chinese
government expanded their efforts against the group internationally. This
included visits to newspaper officers by diplomats to "extol the virtues of
Communist China and the evils of Falun Gong", linking support for Falun Gong
with "jeopardizing trade relations," and sending letters to local politicians
telling them to withdraw support for the practice. According to Perry Link,
pressure on Western institutions also takes more subtle forms, including
academic self-censorship, whereby research on Falun Gong could result in a
denial of visa for fieldwork in China; or exclusion and discrimination from
business and community groups who have connections with China and fear angering
the Communist Party. Ethan Gutmann, a journalist reporting on China since the
early 1990s, has attempted to explain the apparent dearth of public sympathy
for Falun Gong as stemming, in part, from the group's shortcomings in public
relations. Unlike the democracy activists or Tibetans, who have found a
comfortable place in Western perceptions, "Falun Gong marched to a distinctly
Chinese drum", Gutmann writes. Moreover, practitioners' attempts at getting
their message across carried some of the uncouthness of Communist party
culture, including a perception that practitioners tended to exaggerate, create
"torture tableaux straight out of a Cultural Revolution opera", or "spout
slogans rather than facts". This is coupled with a general doubtfulness in the
West of persecuted refugees. Gutmann also notes that media organizations and
human rights groups also self-censor on the topic, given the PRC governments
vehement attitude toward the practice, and the potential repercussions that may
follow for making overt representations on Falun Gong's behalf. Richard Madsen
observes that Falun Gong also lacks robust backing from the American
constituencies that usually support religious freedom: liberals are wary of
Falun Gong's conservative sexual morality, while Christian conservatives don't
accord the practice the same space as persecuted Christians. He charges that
the American political center does not want to push the human rights issue so
hard that it would disrupt commercial and political engagement with China.
Thus, Falun Gong practitioners have largely had to rely on their own resources
in responding to suppression. Controversies. Among the most persistent
controversies surrounding Falun Gong is its characterization by the PRC
government as "xiejiao"‚Äîa "heterodox organization", "evil religion", or "evil
cult". The state-run Chinese Buddhist Association, concerned with Buddhist
apostates taking up Falun Gong practice, were the first to term Falun Gong
"xiejiao" in the latter half of 1996. A direct translation of that term is
"heretical teaching", but during the anti-Falun Gong propaganda campaign was
rendered as "evil cult" in English. Western media initially adopted this
language after the PRC government's media reports, but soon began using less
loaded terms. According to Chang, in the context of imperial China, the term
"xiejiao" was used to refer to non-Confucian religions, though in the context
of Communist China, it has been used to target religious organizations which do
not submit to the authority of the Communist Party. The Chinese government's
view that Falun Gong is a destructive cult, widely used as part of state
propaganda against the practice, was later picked up by some elements of the
anti-cult movement in the West. However, such views are largely criticized or
dismissed in mainstream Western scholarship of the practice. Opinions differ on
whether or not Li Hongzhi made money from the practice, and if so, how much.
Dai Qing states that by 1997, Li was receiving annual income in excess of ¬•10
million through sales of his books, noting that Falun Gong practitioners
purchased numerous copies of Li's works, pictures, and made voluntary
donations. Ian Johnson disputes the theory that Li made any serious money from
Falun Gong, and noted that during the period of Falun Gong's greatest book
sales in China, Li did not receive royalties because all publications were
bootleg‚Äîthe texts having been banned by the authorities in 1996 in an attempt
to curb the practice's growth. Danny Schechter noted that from 1992‚Äì1994,
while Li did charge fees for the lectures seminars he was giving across China
at the invitation of local qigong societies, his fees were considerably lower
than those of competing qigong practices, and the local qigong associations
received a substantial share. Li justified the fees as being necessary to cover
travel costs and other expenses, and on some occasions, he donated the money
earned to charitable causes. In 1994, Li ceased charging fees altogether,
thereafter stipulating that Falun Gong must always be taught for free. The
practice's teachings are available for free download online. Li Hongzhi's
conservative moral teachings have attracted some concern in the West, including
his views on homosexuality. During a lecture in Australia, for instance, Li
Hongzhi said, "Things such as organized crime, homosexuality, and promiscuous
sex, etc., none are the standards of being human." In light of Li's teachings
on homosexuality as immoral, a nomination of Li for the Nobel Peace Prize by
San Francisco legislators was withdrawn in 2001. The Falun Dafa Information
Center states that the group welcomes gays, lesbians, and bisexuals to the
practice, that they are not accorded special treatment, and that while Falun
Gong teaches that certain practices "generate more karma", this does not equate
to a position statement, social stance, or regulation. In discussing the
portrayal of Falun Gong as "anti-gay", Ethan Gutmann notes that Falun Gong's
teachings are "essentially indistinguishable" from traditional religions such
as Christianity, Islam, and Buddhism. Some journalists have also expressed
concern over Falun Gong's belief in different heavens for people of different
races, and the implications of these teachings as they related to interracial
marriages. Concern stems from a statement of Li's identifying such children as
products of "a chaotic situation brought about by mankind" indicative of "the
Dharma-ending period". The Falun Dafa Information Center responded that this
aspect of the practice's cosmology "in no way amounts to an endorsement of
racial purity", adding that many Falun Gong practitioners have interracial
children. Opinions among scholars differ as to whether Falun Gong contains an
apocalyptic message, and if so what the consequences of that are. Li situates
his teaching of Falun Gong amidst the "Dharma-ending period" ("Mo Fa", Êú´Ê≥ï),
described in Buddhist scriptures as an era of moral decline when the teachings
of Buddhism would need to be rectified. The current era is described in Falun
Gong teachings as the "Fa rectification" period ("zhengfa", which might also be
translated as "to correct the dharma"), a time of cosmic transition and
renewal. The process of Fa rectification is necessitated by the moral decline
and degeneration of life in the universe, and in the post-1999 context, the
persecution of Falun Gong by the Chinese government has come to be viewed as a
tangible symptom of this moral decay. Through the process of the Fa
rectification, life will be reordered according to the moral and spiritual
quality of each, with good people being saved and ascending to higher spiritual
planes, and bad ones being eliminated or cast down. In this paradigm, Li
assumes a messianic role of offering salvation through his moral teachings.
Some scholars, such as Maria Hsia Chang and Susan Palmer, have described Li's
rhetoric about the "Fa rectification" and providing salvation "in the final
period of the Last Havoc", as apocalyptic. However, Benjamin Penny argues that
Li's teachings are better understood in the context of a "Buddhist notion of
the cycle of the Dharma or the Buddhist law". Richard Gunde notes that unlike
apocalyptic groups in the West, Falun Gong does not fixate on death or the end
of the world, and instead "has a simple, innocuous ethical message". Li Hongzhi
does not discuss a "time of reckoning", and has rejected predictions of an
impending apocalypse in his teachings. Although he expressed concern over Li's
totalizing discourse and millennial themes, Craig Burgdoff writes that such
concerns are tempered by the fact that Falun Gong practice does not require
unquestioning acceptance of all of Li's teachings, and there is no overt
emphasis on dogmatically enforcing orthodoxy, Instead, Burgdoff writes that he
found "practitioners to be engaged seriously in a highly disciplined spiritual
and ethical practice."
