Fundamentalism Fundamentalism is the demand for a strict adherence to specific
theological doctrines usually understood as a reaction against Modernist
theology, primarily to promote continuity and accuracy. The term
"fundamentalism" was originally coined by its supporters to describe a specific
package of theological beliefs that developed into a movement within the
Protestant community of the United States in the early part of the 20th
century, and that had its roots in the Fundamentalist–Modernist Controversy
of that time. The term usually has a religious connotation indicating
unwavering attachment to a set of irreducible beliefs. "Fundamentalism" is
sometimes used as a pejorative term, particularly when combined with other
epithets (as in the phrase "right-wing fundamentalists"). Christian.
Fundamentalism as a movement arose in the United States, starting among
conservative Presbyterian theologians at Princeton Theological Seminary in the
late 19th century. It soon spread to conservatives among the Baptists and other
denominations around 1910-1920. The movement's purpose was to reaffirm key
theological tenets and defend them against the challenges of liberal theology
and higher criticism. By the late 1910s, theological conservatives rallying
around the Five Fundamentals came to be known as "fundamentalists". In
practice, the first point regarding the Bible was the focus of most of the
controversy. Fundamentalist groups generally refuse to participate in events
with any group that does not share its essential doctrines. In contrast,
Evangelical groups, while they typically agree on the theology "fundamentals"
as expressed in "The Fundamentals", often are willing to participate in events
with religious groups who do not hold to the essential doctrines. Islamic. The
Shia and Sunni religious conflicts since the 7th century created an opening for
radical ideologists, such as Ali Shariati (1933–77), to merge social
revolution with Islamic fundamentalism, as exemplified by Iran in the 1970s.
Islamic fundamentalism has appeared in many counties; the Wahhabi version is
promoted worldwide and financed by Saudi Arabia. The Iran hostage crisis of
1979–80 marked a major turning point in the use of the term "fundamentalism".
The media, in an attempt to explain the ideology of Ayatollah Khomeini and the
Iranian Revolution to a Western audience described it as a "fundamentalist
version of Islam" by way of analogy to the Christian fundamentalist movement in
the U.S. Thus was born the term "Islamic fundamentalist", which would come to
be one of the most common usages of the term in the following years. Hindu.
Hinduism is a conglomeration of distinct intellectual or philosophical points
of view, rather than a rigid common set of beliefs, thus the basic definition
of fundamentalism cannot apply to Hinduism considering that it does not contain
any fundamental thoughts to abide to. The allegations such as "A recent
phenomenon in India has been the rise of Hindu fundamentalism that has led to
political mobilization against Muslims. After eight years of agitation, Hindu
fundamentalists destroyed the 450-year-old Babri Mosque in December 1992. The
Shiv Sena is a political party founded in 1966 originally to express Hindu
fundamentalism. It is allied with the nationalistic Bharatiya Janata Party."
are considered mere speculation and are thought to be aimed at disrupting Hindu
nationalist groups such as the Shiv Sena, Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh and
others. Non-religious. Some Christian theologians, some fundamentalists, and
others pejoratively refer to any philosophy which they see as literal-minded or
they believe carries a pretense of being the sole source of objective truth as
"fundamentalist", regardless of whether it is usually called a religion. For
instance, the Archbishop of Wales has criticized "atheistic fundamentalism"
broadly and said "Any kind of fundamentalism, be it Biblical, atheistic or
Islamic, is dangerous". He also said, "the new fundamentalism of our age ...
leads to the language of expulsion and exclusivity, of extremism and
polarisation, and the claim that, because God is on our side, he is not on
yours." In "The New Inquisition", Robert Anton Wilson, recognized episkopos,
pope, and saint of the parody religion Discordianism, lampoons the members of
skeptical organizations like the Committee for the Scientific Investigation of
Claims of the Paranormal (CSICOP—now the Committee for Skeptical Inquiry) as
fundamentalist materialists, alleging that they dogmatically dismiss any
evidence that conflicts with materialism as hallucination or fraud. In France,
the imposition of restrictions on some displays of religion in state-run
schools has been labeled by some as "secular fundamentalism". In the United
States, private or cultural intolerance of women wearing the hijab (Islamic
headcovering) and political activism by Muslims also has been labeled "secular
fundamentalism" by some Muslims in the U.S. The term "fundamentalism" is
sometimes applied to signify a counter-cultural fidelity to some simplistic
principle, as in the pejorative term "market fundamentalism" applied to an
exaggerated religious-like faith in the ability of unfettered laissez-faire or
free market economic views or policies to solve economic and social problems.
According to economist John Quiggin, the standard features of "economic
fundamentalist rhetoric" are "dogmatic" assertions and the claim that anyone
who holds contrary views is not a real economist. Retired professor in
religious studies Roderick Hindery first lists positive qualities attributed to
political, economic, or other forms of cultural fundamentalism. They include
"vitality, enthusiasm, willingness to back up words with actions, and the
avoidance of facile compromise." Then, negative aspects are analyzed, such as
psychological attitudes, occasionally elitist and pessimistic perspectives, and
in some cases literalism. Atheist. The term "atheistic fundamentalism" is
controversial. In December 2007, the Archbishop of Wales Barry Morgan
criticized what he referred to as "atheistic fundamentalism", claiming that it
advocated that religion has no substance and "that faith has no value and is
superstitious nonsense." He claimed it led to situations such as councils
calling Christmas "Winterval", schools refusing to put on nativity plays and
crosses removed from chapels, though others have disputed this. Winterval was a
name given to a whole series of winter festivals, and was not a renaming of
Christmas. In "The Dawkins Delusion?", Christian theologian Alister McGrath and
his wife, psychologist Joanna Collicutt McGrath, compare Richard Dawkins'
"total dogmatic conviction of correctness" to "a religious fundamentalism which
refuses to allow its ideas to be examined or challenged." Richard Dawkins has
rejected the charge of "fundamentalism," arguing that critics mistake his
"passion"—which he says may match that of evangelical Christians—for an
inability to change his mind. Dawkins asserts that the atheists' position is
not a fundamentalism that is unable to change its mind, but is held based on
the verifiable evidence; as he puts it: "The true scientist, however
passionately he may "believe" in evolution for example, knows exactly what
would change his mind: evidence! The fundamentalist knows that nothing will."
Dawkins has stated that, unlike religious fundamentalists, he would willingly
change his mind if new evidence challenged his current position. Chris Lawrence
2009, quoting "Richard Dawkins: The God delusion", Bantam, 2006, p282.
Criticism. Many criticisms of fundamentalist positions have been offered. One
of the most common is that some claims made by a fundamentalist group cannot be
proven, and are irrational, demonstrably false, or contrary to scientific
evidence. For example, some of these criticisms were famously asserted by
Clarence Darrow in the Scopes Monkey Trial. Sociologist of religion Tex Sample
asserts that it is a mistake to refer to a Muslim, Jewish, or Christian
Fundamentalist. Rather, a fundamentalist's fundamentalism is their primary
concern, over and above other denominational or faith considerations. Dorff,
Elliot N. and Rosett, Arthur, A Living Tree; The Roots and Growth of Jewish
Law, SUNY Press, 1988. A criticism of fundamentalism is the claim that
fundamentalists are selective in what they believe. For instance, the Book of
Genesis dictates that when a man's brother dies, he must marry his widowed
sister-in-law. Yet fundamentalist Christians do not adhere to this doctrine
because there are laws considered addressed to the nation of Israel. The
following passage is where the law comes from and it relates to the Israelite
not being blotted out. However, according to New Testament theology, parts
relating to sins, such as animal sacrifices (Exodus 29:36) and dietary
concerns, are not normative for modern Christians; this is related to the view
that Christ sanctified and fulfills the Law for the person. Jesus is considered
the fulfillment of the law. They may also cite passages such as . When you were
dead in your sins and in the uncircumcision of your sinful nature, God made you
alive with Christ. He forgave us all our sins, having canceled the written
code, with its regulations, that was against us and that stood opposed to us;
he took it away, nailing it to the cross. And having disarmed the powers and
authorities, he made a public spectacle of them, triumphing over them by the
cross. Therefore do not let anyone judge you by what you eat or drink, or with
regard to a religious festival, a New Moon celebration or a Sabbath day. These
are a shadow of the things that were to come; the reality, however, is found in
Christ. Do not let anyone who delights in false humility and the worship of
angels disqualify you for the prize. Such a person goes into great detail about
what he has seen, and his unspiritual mind puffs him up with idle notions. He
has lost connection with the Head, from whom the whole body, supported and held
together by its ligaments and sinews, grows as God causes it to grow. Since you
died with Christ to the basic principles of this world, why, as though you
still belonged to it, do you submit to its rules: "Do not handle! Do not taste!
Do not touch!"? These are all destined to perish with use, because they are
based on human commands and teachings. Such regulations indeed have an
appearance of wisdom, with their self-imposed worship, their false humility and
their harsh treatment of the body, but they lack any value in restraining
sensual indulgence. Albert Camus opposed both Nazi fascism and Stalinist
communism, leading to a split with Jean-Paul Sartre. In the "Myth of Sisyphus"
he developed the concept of philosophical suicide. This is any ideological
system or belief that claims to bridge the gap between man's yearning for
absolute unity versus what he saw as the inherent irrational nature of the
universe. Influential criticisms of Fundamentalism include James Barr's books
on Christian Fundamentalism and Bassam Tibi's analysis of Islamic
Fundamentalism. There are also some criticisms against the political usage of
the term "fundamentalism". "Fundamentalism" has been often used by a political
group to attack their political enemies. The term would be used flexibly
depending on the political interests and context of the time. According to
Judith Nagata, a professor of Asia Research Institute in the National
University of Singapore, The Afghan "mujahiddin", locked in combat with the
Soviet enemy in the 1980s, could be praised as "freedom fighters" by their
American backers at the time, while the present Taliban, viewed, among other
things, as protectors of American enemy Osama bin Laden, are unequivocally
"fundamentalist".”" Controversy. The Associated Press' "AP Stylebook"
recommends that the term fundamentalist not be used for any group that does not
apply the term to itself. A great many scholars have adopted a similar
position. A good many scholars, however, use the term in the broader
descriptive sense to refer to various groups in various religious traditions
including those groups that would object to being classified as
fundamentalists. That is the way that the term is used in "The Fundamentalism
Project" by Martin Marty, et al., from the University of Chicago. Christian
fundamentalists, who generally consider the term to be pejorative when used to
refer to themselves, often object to the placement of themselves and Islamist
groups into a single category given that the fundamentals of Christianity are
different from the fundamentals of Islam. They feel that characteristics based
on the new definition are wrongly projected back onto Christian fundamentalists
by their critics. Many Muslims object to the use of the term when referring to
Islamist groups, and oppose being placed in the same category as Christian
fundamentalists, whom they see as theologically incomplete. Unlike Christian
fundamentalist groups, Islamist groups do not use the term fundamentalist to
refer to themselves. Shia groups which are often considered fundamentalist in
the western world generally are not described that way in the Islamic world.
