Guru Guru (Devanagari ) is a Sanskrit term for "teacher" or "master",
especially in Indian religions. The Hindu guru-shishya tradition is the oral
tradition or religious doctrine transmitted from teacher to student. In the
United States, the meaning of "guru" has been used to cover anyone who acquires
followers, especially by exploiting their naiveté, due to the inflationary use
of the term in new religious movements. Etymology. The word "", a noun, means
"teacher" in Sanskrit and in other languages derived from or borrowing words
from Sanskrit, such as Hindi, Punjabi, Tamil, Telugu, Kannada, Malayalam,
Marathi, Oriya, Bengali, Gujarati and Nepali. The malayalam term Acharyan or
Asan are derivered from the Sanskrit word Acharya. It is transliterated in
different ways such as Asaan, Ashan, Aasaan etc. As a noun the word means the
imparter of knowledge ("jñāna"; also Pali: "ñāna"). As an adjective, it
means 'heavy,' or 'weighty,' in the sense of "heavy with knowledge," heavy with
spiritual wisdom, "heavy with spiritual weight," "heavy with the good qualities
of scriptures and realization," or "heavy with a wealth of knowledge." The word
has its roots in the Sanskrit "gri" (to invoke, or to praise), and may have a
connection to the word "gur", meaning 'to raise, lift up, or to make an
effort'. Sanskrit "guru" is cognate with Latin "gravis" 'heavy; grave, weighty,
serious' and Greek βαρύς "barus" 'heavy'. All Proto-Indo-European root
"*gʷerə-", specifically from the zero-grade form *"gʷr̥ə-". A traditional
etymology of the term "guru" is based on the interplay between darkness and
light. The guru is seen as the one who "dispels the darkness of ignorance." In
some texts it is described that the syllables "gu" () and "ru" () stand for
darkness and light, respectively. Reender Kranenborg disagrees, stating that
darkness and light have nothing to do with the word "guru". He describes this
as a folk etymology.Dutch original: "a. De goeroe als geestelijk raadsman Als
we naar het verschijnsel goeroe in India kijken, kunnen we constateren dat er
op zijn minst vier vormen van goeroeschap te onderscheiden zijn. De eerste vorm
is die van de 'geestelijk raadsman'. Voordat we dit verder uitwerken eerst iets
over de etymologie. Het woord goeroe komt uit het Sanskriet, wordt geschreven
als 'guru' en betekent 'zwaar zijn', 'gewichtig zijn', vooral in figuurlijk
opzicht. Zo krijgt het begrip 'guru' de betekenis van 'groot', 'geweldig' of
'belangrijk', en iets verdergaand krijgt het aspecten van 'eerbiedwaardig' en
'vererenswaardig'. Al vrij snel word dit toegepast op de 'geestelijk leraar'.
In allerlei populaire literatuur, ook in India zelf, wordt het woord 'guru'
uiteengelegd in 'gu' en 'ru', als omschrijvingen voor licht en duister; de
goeroe is dan degene die zijn leerling uit het materiële duister overbrengt
naar het geestelijk licht. Misschien doe een goeroe dat ook inderdaad, maar het
heeft niets met de betekenis van het woord te maken, het is
volksetymologie."English translation "a. The guru as spiritual adviser: If we
look at the phenomenon of gurus in India then we can see that there are at
least four forms of guruship that can be distinguished. The first form is that
of the "spiritual adviser." Before we will elaborate on this, first something
about the etymology. The word "guru" comes from Sanskrit and is written as
'guru' en means 'being heavy', 'being weighty', especially metaphorically. In
that way, the concept of guru gets the meaning of 'big', 'great', or
'important' and somewhat further it also gets aspects of 'respectable' and
'honorable'. Soon it is applied to the 'spiritual adviser'. In various popular
literature, in India herself too, the word 'guru' is explained in the parts
'gu' and 'ru', as descriptions for light and darkness: the guru is then the
person who bring the student from the material darkness into the spiritual
light. A guru may indeed do that, but it has nothing to do with the meaning of
the word, it is folk etymology." Another etymology of the word "guru" found in
the Guru Gita, includes "gu" as "beyond the qualities" and "ru" as "devoid of
form", stating that "He who bestows that nature which transcend the qualities
is said to be guru". The meanings of "gu" and "ru" can also be traced to the
Sutras indicating concealment and its annulment. In "Western Esotericism and
the Science of Religion", Pierre Riffard makes a distinction between "occult"
and "scientific" etymologies, citing as an example of the former the etymology
of 'guru' in which the derivation is presented as "gu" ("darkness") and "ru"
('to push away'); the latter he exemplifies by "guru" with the meaning of
'heavy'. Guru in Hinduism. In the sentence mentioned above, "guru" is used more
or less interchangeably with "satguru" (literally: "true teacher") and
"satpurusha." Compare also Swami. The disciple of a guru is called a "śiṣya"
or "chela". Often a guru lives in an ashram or in a "gurukula" (the guru's
household), together with his disciples. The lineage of a guru, spread by
disciples who carry on the guru's message, is known as the guru "parampara", or
disciplic succession. The role of the guru continues in the original sense of
the word in such Hindu traditions as the "Vedānta", yoga, "tantra" and
"bhakti" schools. Indeed, it is now a standard part of Hinduism that a guru is
one's spiritual guide on earth. In some more mystical traditions it is believed
that the guru could awaken dormant spiritual knowledge within the pupil. The
act of doing this is known as "shaktipat". In Hinduism, the guru is considered
a respected person with saintly qualities who enlightens the mind of his or her
disciple, an educator from whom one receives the initiatory mantra, and one who
instructs in rituals and religious ceremonies. The Vishnu Smriti and Manu
Smriti regard the teacher and the mother and father as the most venerable
influences on an individual. In Indian culture, a person without a guru or a
teacher (acharya) was once looked down on as an orphan or unfortunate one. The
word "anatha" in Sanskrit means "the one without a teacher." An acharya is the
giver of "gyan" (knowledge) in the form of "shiksha" (instruction). A guru also
gives "diksha" "initiation" which is the spiritual awakening of the disciple by
the grace of the guru. Diksha is also considered to be the procedure of
bestowing the divine powers of a guru upon the disciple, through which the
disciple progresses continuously along the path to divinity. The concept of the
"guru" can be traced as far back as the early Upanishads, where the idea of the
Divine Teacher on earth first manifested from its early Brahmin associations.
The guru-shishya tradition. The guru-shishya tradition is the transmission of
teachings from a "guru" (teacher, ) to a " (disciple, ). In this relationship,
subtle and advanced knowledge is conveyed and received through the student's
respect, commitment, devotion and obedience. The student eventually masters the
knowledge that the guru embodies. The dialogue between guru and disciple is a
fundamental component of Hinduism, established in the oral traditions of the
Upanishads (c. 2000 BC). The term Upanishad derives from the Sanskrit words
"upa" (near), "ni" (down) and şad (to sit) — "sitting down near" a spiritual
teacher to receive instruction. Examples include the relationship between
Krishna and Arjuna in the Mahabharata (Bhagavad Gita), and between Rama and
Hanuman in the Ramayana. In the Upanishads, the guru-disciple relationship
appears in many settings (a husband answers a wife's questions about
immortality; a teenage boy is taught by Yama, who is Death personified, etc.)
Sometimes the sages are female, and sometimes the instruction is sought by
kings. In the Vedas, the "brahmavidya" or knowledge of Brahman is communicated
from guru to shishya orally. The word Sikh is derived from the Sanskrit
"shishya." Assessing a disciple. At the beginning of the "Upadesasahasri"
Samkara provides a list of criteria by which the guru assesses prospective
disciples. It is clear that Samkara did not regard the examination of
candidates as a mere formality. The guru assesses the applicant using the
following criteria: the candidate is not attached to anything impermanent; he
has renounced the desire for a son; he has no desire for wealth; he is at peace
with himself, master of his senses and compassionate. In addition, the guru
checks the applicant's caste, behaviour, knowledge of Veda and even earlier
generations of his family. Knowledge was not regarded as a universal right, as
it often is today. Access to knowledge via the guru was the privilege of a very
small minority. It was the norm to transmit knowledge in the erudite language
of Sanskrit without translation. Mastery of Sanskrit was therefore essential.
What was taught by guru was the universal reality of Brahman, but access to
this knowledge was highly restricted. Ultimate knowledge was founded on the
Veda, and the guru followed the instruction of the texts: no one belonging to
the sudra caste was allowed access. Women and foreigners were also excluded.
Attributes of guru. Gurus of several Hindu denominations are often referred to
as Satgurus. In the Upanishads, five signs of satguru (true guru) are
mentioned. According to the Indologist Georg Feuerstein, the preceptors were
traditionally treated with great reverence, granted excessive authority, and
identified with the "transcendental Reality". He writes that partly to
counterbalance this deification, some Hindu schools began to emphasize that the
real teacher is the transcendental "Self". The Shiva Samhita, a late medieval
text on Hatha yoga, enshrines the figure of the guru as essential for
liberation, and asserts that the disciple should give all his or her property
and livestock to the guru upon "diksha" (initiation). The Vishnu Smriti and
Manu Smriti regard the Acharya (teacher/guru), along with the mother and the
father, as the most venerable individuals. The mother and father are the first
"guru," the spiritual guru is the second. The Mundaka Upanishad says that in
order to realize the supreme godhead, one should surrender one's self before
the guru who knows the secrets of the Vedas. On the role of the guru, Swami
Sivananda asks: "Do you realize now the sacred significance and the supreme
importance of the Guru's role in the evolution of man? It was not without
reason that the India of the past carefully tended and kept alive the lamp of
Guru-Tattva. It is therefore not without reason that India, year after year,
age after age, commemorates anew this ancient concept of the Guru, adores it
and pays homage to it again and again, and thereby re-affirms its belief and
allegiance to it. For, the true Indian knows that the Guru is the only
guarantee for the individual to transcend the bondage of sorrow and death, and
experience the Consciousness of the Reality." Rituals. "Guru Purnima" is the
day when the disciple wakes up and expresses gratitude. The purpose of the Guru
Purnima (or Poornima) celebration is to review the preceding year to see how
much one has progressed in life, to renew one's determination, and to focus on
one's progress on the spiritual path. "Guru Puja" (literally "worship of the
guru") the practice of worshiping the guru through the making of offerings and
requesting inspiration from the guru. Vows and commitments made by the disciple
or "shishya", which might have lost their strength, are renewed. "Guru Bhakti"
(literally "devotion to the guru") is considered important in many schools and
sects. In modern Hinduism. Some Hindu denominations like BAPS Swaminarayan
Sanstha hold that a personal relationship with a living guru, revered as the
embodiment of God, is essential in seeking moksha. The guru is the one who
guides his or her disciple to become jivanmukta, the liberated soul able to
achieve salvation in his or her lifetime. Best known representatives include
Maha MahaRishi Paranjothiar (Kundalini Yoga), Maharishi Mahesh Yogi
(Transcendental Meditation), Sai Baba, A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada,
Balyogeshwar (also known as "Guru Maharaj Ji", "Maharaji", and "Prem Rawat")
(Divine Light Mission), and Rajneesh (Sannyasis). Guru in Buddhism. In the
Theravada Buddhist tradition, the teacher is a valued and honoured mentor
worthy of great respect and is a source of inspiration on the path to
Enlightenment, however the teacher is not generally considered to be a guru but
rather a spiritual friend or Kalyāṇa-mittatā. In the Tibetan tradition, the
guru is seen as the Buddha, the very root of spiritual realization and the
basis of the path. Without the teacher, it is asserted, there can be no
experience or insight. In Tibetan texts, great emphasis is placed upon praising
the virtues of the guru. Blessed by the guru, whom the disciple regards as a
Bodhisattva, or the embodiment of Buddha, the disciple can continue on the way
to experiencing the true nature of reality. The disciple shows great
appreciation and devotion for the guru, whose blessing is the last of the four
foundations of Vajrayana Buddhism. The Dalai Lama, speaking of the importance
of the guru, said: ""Rely on the teachings to evaluate a guru: Do not have
blind faith, but also no blind criticism."" He also observed that the term
'living Buddha' is a translation of the Chinese words "huo fuo". In Tibetan, he
said, the operative word is "lama" which means 'guru'. A guru is someone who is
not necessarily a Buddha, but is heavy with knowledge. Tantric teachings
include the practice of guru yoga, visualizing the guru and making offerings
praising the guru. The guru is known as the "vajra" (literally "diamond") guru.
Initiations or ritual empowerments are necessary before the student is
permitted to practise a particular tantra. The guru does not perform initiation
as an individual, but as the person's own Buddha-nature reflected in the
personality of the guru. The disciple is asked to make samaya or vows and
commitments which preserve the spiritual link to the guru, and is told that to
break this link is a serious downfall. Guru in Sikhism. The Sikh Gurus were
fundamental to the Sikh religion, however the concept in Sikhism differs from
other usages. Sikhism is derived from the Sanskrit word "shishya", or disciple
and is all about the relationship between the teacher and a student. The core
beliefs of Sikhism are of belief in the One God and in Ten Gurus, enshrined in
Guru Granth Sahib, the Sikh holy book. The concept of Guru in Sikhism stands on
two pillars i.e. Miri-Piri. 'Piri' means spiritual authority and 'Miri' means
temporal authority. Therefore, Guru in Sikhism is a teacher-leader.
Traditionally, the spiritual authority in Sikhism has always been the word and
which is still preserved in the Guru Granth Sahib. And for temporal authority,
as the word passed through 10 mortal bodies and finally into the collective
corporate body known as the Khalsa till eternity, kept changing with finally
been vested in the Khalsa when Guru Gobind Singh, the 10th Guru, merged into
it. Sri Guru Nanak Dev Ji, the first guru of Sikhism, was opposed to the caste
system prevalent in India in his time, and he accepted Hindus, Muslims and
people from other religions as disciples. His followers referred to him as the
Guru (teacher). Before he left the world he designated a new Guru to be his
successor and to lead the Sikh community. This procedure was continued till
March 30, 1699. In addition to the original ten teachers, the Guru Granth
Sahib, their holy book, and the Khalsa was made the eleventh perpetual Guru of
the Sikhs. Together they make up the eleven Gurus of Sikhism. Succession and
lineage (parampara). The word parampara (Sanskrit परम्परा)
denotes a long succession of teachers and disciples in traditional Indian
culture. The "Hinduism Dictionary" defines parampara is "the line of spiritual
gurus in authentic succession of initiation; the chain of mystical power and
authorized continuity, passed from guru to guru." In Sanskrit, the word
literally means: "Uninterrupted series of succession". The "Guru (teacher)
Shishya (disciple) parampara" or guru parampara, occurs where the "knowledge"
(in any field) is passed down undiluted through the succeeding generations. It
is the traditional, residential form of education, where the Shishya remains
and learns with his Guru as a family member. The domains may include spiritual,
artistic ("Kalā" कला such as music or dance) or educational. David C.
Lane, a professor of sociology, and, since 2005, an ex-member and critic of
Radha Soami Satsang Beas, argued in 1997 that based on his research of the
Radha Soami movement that few gurus have a flawless and well-documented
lineage, and that there is quite often conflict between different disciples
claiming to be the only legitimate successor of their guru.[http://
members.tripod.com/~dlane5/lineage.html] Western perspective. As an alternative
to established religions, some people in Europe and the USA who were not of
Indian extraction have looked up to spiritual guides and gurus from India,
seeking them to provide them answers to the meaning of life, and to achieve a
more direct experience free from intellectualism and philosophy. Gurus from
many denominations traveled to Western Europe and the USA and established
followings. One of the first to do so was Swami Vivekananda who addressed the
World Parliament of Religions assembled in Chicago, Illinois in 1893. In
particular during the 1960s and 1970s many gurus acquired groups of young
followers in Western Europe and the USA. According to the American sociologist
David G. Bromley this was partially due to the repeal of the Chinese Exclusion
Act in 1965 which permitted Asian gurus entrance to the USA. According to the
Dutch Indologist Albertina Nugteren, the repeal was only one of several factors
and a minor one compared with the two most important causes for the surge of
all things 'Eastern': the post-war cross-cultural mobility and the general
dissatisfaction with established Western values. According to the professor in
sociology Stephen A. Kent at the University of Alberta and Kranenborg (1974),
one of the reasons why in 1970s young people including hippies turned to gurus
was because they found that drugs had opened for them the existence of the
transcendental or because they wanted to get "high" without drugs. According to
Kent, another reason why this happened so often in the USA then, was because
some anti-Vietnam War protesters and political activists became worn out or
disillusioned of the possibilities to change society through political means,
and as an alternative turned to religious means. Some gurus and the groups they
lead attracted opposition. One example of such group was the Hare Krishna
movement (ISKCON) founded by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada in 1966, many
of whose followers voluntarily accepted the demandingly ascetic lifestyle of
bhakti yoga on a full-time basis, in stark contrast to much of the popular
culture of the time."Devotees don't have such an easy time. They who choose to
live in the temples – now a very small minority -chant the Hare Krishna
mantra 1,728 time a day. […] Those living in an ashram – far fewer than in
the 1970s – have to get up at 4am for worship. All members have to give up
meat, fish and eggs; alcohol, tobacco, drugs, tea and coffee; gambling, sports,
games and novels; and sex except for procreation with marriage […] It's a
demanding lifestyle. Outsiders may wonder why people join." According to
Kranenborg (1984), Jesus fits the Hindu definition and characteristics of a
guru." Viewpoints. Gurus and the Guru-shishya tradition have been criticized
and assessed by secular scholars, theologians, anti-cultists, skeptics, and
religious philosophers.
