Hate group A hate group is an organized group or movement that advocates and
practices hatred, hostility, or violence towards members of a race, ethnicity,
religion, gender, sexual orientation or other designated sector of society.
According to the United States Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), hate
groups' "primary purpose is to promote animosity, hostility, and malice against
persons belonging to a race, religion, disability, sexual orientation, or
ethnicity/national origin which differs from that of the members of the
organization." The Southern Poverty Law Center's (SPLC) definition of a "hate
group" includes those having beliefs or practices that attack or malign an
entire class of people, typically for their immutable characteristics. In the
US, two main organizations that monitor intolerance and hate groups are the
Anti-Defamation League (ADL) and the SPLC. Hate groups are also tracked by the
FBI. The ADL and the SPLC maintain a list of what they deem to be hate groups,
supremacist groups and anti-Semitic, anti-government or extremist groups that
have committed hate crimes. However, at least for the SPLC, inclusion of a
group in the list "does not imply a group advocates or engages in violence or
other criminal activity." According to the SPLC, from 2000 to 2008, hate group
activity saw a 50 percent increase in the US, with a total of 926 active
groups. The FBI does not publish a list of hate groups, and "nvestigations are
conducted only when a threat or advocacy of force is made; when the group has
the apparent ability to carry out the proclaimed act; and when the act would
constitute a potential violation of federal law." Violence and hate crimes. The
California Association for Human Relations Organizations (CAHRO) asserts that
hate groups such as the Ku Klux Klan (KKK) and White Aryan Resistance (WAR)
preach violence against racial, religious, sexual and other minorities in the
United States. Joseph E. Agne argues that hate-motivated violence is a result
of the successes of the civil rights movement, and asserts that the KKK has
resurfaced and new hate groups have formed. Agne argues that it is a mistake to
underestimate the strength of the hate-violence movement, its apologists and
its silent partners. In the US, crimes that "manifest evidence of prejudice
based on race, religion, sexual orientation, or ethnicity, including the crimes
of murder and nonnegligent manslaughter; forcible rape; robbery; aggravated
assault; burglary; larceny-theft; motor vehicle theft; arson; simple assault;
intimidation; and destruction, damage or vandalism of property", directed at
the government, an individual, a business, or institution, involving hate
groups and hate crimes, may be investigated as acts of domestic terrorism. Hate
speech. Counterterrorism expert Ehud Sprinzak argues that verbal violence is
"the use of extreme language against an individual or a group that either
implies a direct threat that physical force will be used against them, or is
seen as an indirect call for others to use it." Sprinzak argues that verbal
violence is often a substitute for real violence, and that the verbalization of
hate has the potential to incite people who are incapable of distinguishing
between real and verbal violence to engage in actual violence. Historian Daniel
Goldhagen, discussing antisemitic hate groups, argues that we should view
verbal violence as "an assault in its own right, having been intended to
produce profound damage—emotional, psychological, and social—to the dignity
and honor of the Jews. The wounds that people suffer by ... such vituperation
... can be as bad as ... beating." In the mid-1990s, the popularity of the
Interne] brought new international exposure to many organizations, including
groups with beliefs such as white supremacy, neo-Nazism, homophobia, Holocaust
denial or Islamophobia. Several white supremacist groups have founded websites
dedicated to attacking their perceived enemies. In 1996, the Simon Wiesenthal
Center of Los Angeles asked Internet access providers to adopt a code of ethics
that would prevent extremists from publishing their ideas online. In 1996, the
European Commission formed the Consultative Commission on Racism and Xenophobia
(CRAX), a pan-European group which was tasked to "investigate and, using legal
means, stamp out the current wave of racism on the Internet." Religious hate
groups. The Southern Poverty Law Center has designated several Christian groups
as hate groups, including American Family Association, Family Research Council,
Abiding Truth Ministries, American Vision, Chalcedon Foundation, Dove World
Outreach Center and Traditional Values Coalition. The SPLC classes Nation of
Islam (NOI) as a hate group under the category "black separatist". The NOI
preaches that a black scientist named Yakub created the white race, a "race of
devils", on the Greek island of Patmos. The NOI, unlike traditional Muslim
groups, does not accept white members and is not regarded as a legitimate
branch of Islam by mainstream Muslims. The white supremacist Creativity
Movement (formerly World Church of the Creator), led by Matthew F. Hale, is
associated with violence and bigotry. Aryan Nations is another religion-based
white supremacist hate group. Westboro Baptist Church is considered a hate
group for its provocative stance against homosexuality and America. Internet
hate groups. Traditionally, hate groups recruited members and spread extremist
messages by word of mouth, or through the distribution of flyers and pamphlets.
In contrast, the Internet allows members from all over the world to engage in
real-time conversations. The Internet has been a boon for hate groups in terms
of promotion, recruitment and expanding their base to include younger
audiences. An Internet hate group does not have to be a part of a traditional
faction such as the Ku Klux Klan. The Simon Wiesenthal Center (SWC), in its
2009 "iReport", identified more than 10,000 problematic hate and terrorist
websites and other Internet postings. The report includes hate websites, social
networks, blogs, newsgroups, YouTube and other video sites. The findings
illustrate that as the Internet continues to grow, extremists find new ways to
seek validation for their hateful agendas and to recruit members. Facebook hate
page/group creators choose their target, set up a site, and then recruit
members Anyone can create a Facebook group and invite followers to post
comments, add pictures and participate in discussion boards. A Facebook page is
similar, except one must ‘like’ the page to become a member. Because of the
ease of creating and joining such groups, many so-called hate groups exist only
in cyberspace Psychopathology of hate groups. According to a 2003 FBI Law
Enforcement bulletin, a hate group, if unimpeded, passes through seven
successive stages. In the first four stages, hate groups vocalize their beliefs
and in the last three stages, they act on their beliefs. The report points to a
transition period that exists between verbal violence and acting that violence
out, separating hardcore haters from rhetorical haters. Thus, hate speech is
seen as a prerequisite of hate crimes, and as a condition of their possibility.
