Imperium (Warhammer 40,000) The Imperium of Man is a galactic empire in the
dystopian far-future fictional universe created by Games Workshop as the
background for its "Warhammer 40,000" series of novels and games. The Imperium
rules over almost all of humanity and spans over a million worlds. Origins. The
Imperium is established on Terra (Earth) in the 30th millennium AD as the
planet's sole authority; several centuries later, it embarks on a so-called ,
an interstellar intended to bring all human-settled worlds in the Milky Way
galaxy under its banner. Over the course of two Terran centuries, the Crusade
reaches star systems more thanÂ 50,000 light years away from its original
staging point in the Sol (Solar) System, assimilates millions of worlds into
the Imperium, and gives Humankind a dominant position among the galaxy's
species; according to Imperial propaganda, it is humanity's "Manifest Destiny"
to rule the galaxy. Early in the 31st millennium, the Crusade comes to a sudden
stop as the Imperium is nearly torn asunder in a galaxy-wide civil war known as
the Horus Heresy; the war decimates and eventually redefines the Imperium.
Following the Horus Heresy, the crippled institution undergoes a centuries-
long, often violent rebuilding. Current timeline. In late 41st millennium, the
fictional universe's "current" time period, the Imperium of Mankind is a regime
that bears little resemblance to its pre-Heresy counterpart. It is depicted as
a loose empire ruling over a million worlds, with a total population presumably
in the quadrillions. It is united chiefly through religious fanaticism and
threats of brutal disciplinary force. The Imperium still claims lone dominion
over the Milky Way and all humanity; it does not recognize other governments,
whether human or alien, and in fact actively maintains that all aliens must be
subjugated or destroyed. The Imperium teeters on the verge of collapse due to a
combination of war, technological and spiritual stagnation, and bureaucratic
inefficiency. Emperor of Mankind. The founder of the Imperium, an enigmatic and
mysterious persona known only as "the Emperor of Mankind," is an immortal of
immeasurable psychic power. The Emperor does not actually participate in
affairs of state for medical reasons. Near the end of the Horus Heresy he is
critically injured in battle and never recovers; since then he survives on life
support in a nearly unresponsive state. What little consciousness he has left
is devoted to projecting a psychic beacon, the to help human starships navigate
the parallel dimension of the where faster than light travel is possible. From
time to time, he psychically communicates vague visions of the future that
trained can interpret through special tarot cards, but he cannot explicitly
communicate his will. Though the Emperor is the nominal head of state, in
practice the highest tier of command is the High Lords of Terra, based on
Earth, who have ruled for over ten millennia in the Emperor's name. Stagnant
society. Imperial society is characterized by religious intolerance,
superstition, xenophobia, militarism, and antiscience. Critical thinking is
considered a waste of time. Ignorance of anything beyond one's place in society
is common. Unquestioning obedience to authority is a virtue. The is not an age
of reason but an age of superstition and ignorance. Calcified technology.
Throughout the Imperium, science has stopped. All technological knowledge is
controlled by the Adeptus Mechanicus, a religious order that treats technology
as a form of magic and deems scientific thinking heretical. Mechanicus tech-
priests build and maintain almost all of the Imperium's advanced technology,
but they understand little of its workings and oppose any attempts to study and
improve upon it. They blindly follow ancient instruction manuals: these designs
are not considered the product of human inventiveness, but revelations of a
being known as "the Machine God." The Mechanicus believes that in pre-Imperium
days, the Machine God gifted humanity with all the knowledge there is to know.
They believe every machine is inhabited by a "machine spirit" that must be
appeased through proper rites, or else the device will malfunction. These rites
are as likely to involve incense and prayer as they are to involve lubricants,
(computer) repairs, or pressing buttons. The Mechanicus refuses to innovate on
the set designs, viewing mortal modifications as sacrilegious. It considers
only ancient, forgotten knowledge to be pure, and regularly sends
archaeologists on expeditions for ancient blueprints such rare discoveries are
the only occasions when Imperial technology may progress. The Imperium's most
powerful war machines and ships are often ancient devices which the tech-
priests do not know how to replicate, only maintain. Alien technology is viewed
as corrupt, and the Mechanicus refuses to reverse-engineer and redistribute
captured devices, even when such technology outclasses the Imperium's. As a
result of these superstitions, Imperial technology has progressed very little
since the Great Crusade. Knowledge proliferates so slowly that many Imperial
worlds remain primitive, and some are in fact regressing. Religious extremism.
The Imperium promotes the , the worship of the Emperor as humankind's only true
god and rightful master. He is the savior, the only one who can protect
Humanity from the dangers of the cosmos. However, this is contrary to the
Imperium's founding principles and a subversion of the Emperor's wishes. Before
the Horus Heresy, the Emperor had imposed and promulgated the secular
rationalist , and set out to free humanity throughout the galaxy from the
shackles of superstition and religion, while specifically forbidding worship of
himself as divine. It is unclear exactly when and how the worship of the
Emperor as god became common practice, although it occured after he was put on
life support. Just as all human-inhabited worlds must be brought under the
Imperium's control, all other religions must be expunged. The state religion,
which is the responsibility of the or Adeptus Ministorum (the State Church),
promotes the idea that unquestioning obedience and self-sacrifice is the best
way to honor the Emperor. It teaches that mutants (with a few exceptions) are
vile perversions of the holy human form, and thus they are subject to the worst
oppression. Rogue psykers ("witches") are harbingers of doom. Heresy is the
worst crime of all, and those judged as heretics are stripped of all rights and
punished in the most horrific fashion. Religion is a central theme in all
"WarhammerÂ 40,000" fiction. Most human protagonists, from warrior-monk Space
Marines to Witch Hunters of the Inquisition, are fanatical worshipers of the
God-Emperor. Cruel regime. The Imperium's methods for enforcing order and
discipline are exceedingly brutal. In source material it is described as "the
cruelest and most bloody regime imaginable". The Inquisition makes liberal use
of torture, and it cares more about crushing the guilty than protecting the
innocent, thus many innocents are killed in their witch-hunts. Witches and
heretics are publicly flogged or burned at the stake. Imperial Guard units
often have political officers () attached to them, who have the authority to
execute out-of-hand any soldier who displays cowardice or disobedience.
Occasionally, the Imperium resorts to destroying entire worlds with weapons of
mass destruction in order to suppress heresy, rebellion, or alien encroachment.
