Jainism Jainism () is a religion that prescribes a path of non-violence towards
all living beings. Its philosophy and practice emphasize the necessity of self-
effort to move the soul toward divine consciousness and liberation. Any soul
that has conquered its own inner enemies and achieved the state of supreme
being is called a "jina" ("conqueror" or "victor"). The ultimate status of
these perfect souls is called siddha. Ancient texts also refer to Jainism as
"shramana dharma" (self-reliant) or the "path of the nirganthas" (those without
attachments or aversions). Jain doctrine teaches that Jainism has always
existed and will always exist. Like most ancient Indian religions, Jainism may
have its roots in the Indus Valley Civilization, reflecting native spirituality
prior to the Indo-Aryan migration into India. Other scholars suggested the
shramana traditions were separate and contemporaneous with Indo-Aryan religious
practices of the historical Vedic religion. Several historians date the
foundation of the organized or present form of Jainism to sometime between the
9th and the 7th century BCE. Contemporary Jainism is a religious minority with
4.2 million followers in India and immigrant communities in Belgium, United
States, Hong Kong, Japan, Singapore etc. Jains have the highest degree of
literacy for a religious community in India. Several Jain libraries are the
oldest in the country. Core Principles. Mahavratas. Jainism encourages
spiritual development through cultivation of one's own personal wisdom and
reliance on self control through vows (, "vrata"). Jainism acknowledges that
every person has different capabilities and capacities to practice and
therefore accepts different levels of compliance for ascetics and householders.
The Great Vows are prescribed for Jain monastics while limited vows
("anuvrata") are prescribed for householders. Householders are encouraged to
practice five cardinal principles of non-violence, truthfulness, non-stealing,
celibacy, and non-possessiveness with their current practical limitations,
while monks and nuns have to observe them very strictly. With consistent
practice, it is possible to overcome the limitations gradually, accelerating
spiritual progress. Non-creationism. Jainism does not support belief in a
creator deity. According to Jain doctrine, the universe and its
constituents—soul, matter, space, time, and principles of motion—have
always existed. All the constituents and actions are governed by universal
natural laws. Through the ages, Jain philosophers have adamantly rejected and
opposed the concept of creator and omnipotent God. A number of Jainism's core
beliefs focus on the soul. Jain beliefs hold that every living being is a soul
which is potentially divine. Souls possess innate qualities of infinite
knowledge, perception, power, and bliss (masked by its karmas). Every soul is
born as a heavenly being, human, sub-human (animal) or hellish being according
to its own karma. Four things are difficult for a soul to attain: (1) human
birth, (2) knowledge of the laws governing the souls, (3) absolute conviction
in the philosophy of non-violence, and (4) practicing this knowledge with
conviction in everyday life activities. For Jains, every soul is the architect
of its own life—here or hereafter. When a soul is freed from karmas, it
becomes free and attains divine consciousness—experiencing infinite
knowledge, perception, power, and bliss (Moksha). Ratnatraya. Jainism
emphasizes that ratnatraya (triple gems of Jainism) — the Right View("Samyak
Darshana"), Right Knowledge ("Samyak Gyana") and Right Conduct ("Samyak
Charitra") — constitutes the path to liberation. These are known as the
triple gems (or jewels) of Jainism and hence also known as "Ratnatraya". These
three are essential for the soul to move up spiritually. Anekāntavāda.
Anēkāntavāda ("multiple points of view") is a foundation of Jain philosophy.
This philosophy allows the Jains to accept the truth in other philosophies from
their perspective and thus inculcating a tolerance for other viewpoints. Jain
scholars have devised methods to view both physical objects and abstract ideas
from different perspectives systematically. This is the application of non-
violence in the sphere of thought. It is a Jain philosophical standpoint just
as there is the Advaitic standpoint of Sankara and the standpoint of the
"middle way" of the Buddhists. This search to view things from different angles
leads to understanding and toleration of different and even conflicting views.
When this happens prejudices subside and a tendency to accommodate increases.
The doctrine of "Anēkānta" is therefore a unique experiment of non-violence
at the root. Concept of karma. Karma in Jainism conveys a totally different
meaning than commonly understood in the Hindu philosophy and western
civilization. It is not the so-called inaccessible force that controls the fate
of living beings in inexplicable ways. It does not simply mean "deed", "work",
nor mystical force ("adrsta"), but a complex of very fine matter, imperceptible
to the senses, which interacts with the soul in intensity and quantity
proportional to the thoughts, speech and physical actions carried out with
attachments and aversions, causing further bondages. Karma in Jainism is
something material ("karmapaudgalam"), which produces certain conditions, like
a medical pill has many effects. The effects of karma in Jainism is therefore a
system of natural laws rather than moral laws. When one holds an apple in one's
hand and then lets go of the apple, the apple will fall due to gravitational
force. In this example, there is no moral judgment involved, since this is a
mechanical consequence of a physical action. The concept of Karma in Jainism is
basically a reaction due to the attachment or aversion with which an activity
(both positive and negative) is executed in thought, verbal, and physical
sense. Extending on the example outlined, the same apple dropped within a zero
gravity environment such as a spacecraft circling around earth, will float in
its place. Similarly, when one acts without attachment and aversion there will
be no further karmic bonding to the soul. Karmas are grouped as "Destructive
Karmas", that obstruct the true nature of the soul and "Non-Destructive Karmas"
that only affect the body in which the soul resides. As long as there are
Destructive Karmas, the soul is caged in a body and will have to experience
pain and suffering in many different forms. Jainism has extensive sub-
classifications and detailed explanations of each of these major categories.
Jain liturgy and scriptures explains ways to stop the influx as well as get rid
of the accumulated karmas. Tirthankaras. a ( "ford-Maker", ) is a human being
who helps in achieving liberation and enlightenment as an "Arihant" by
destroying all of their soul constraining ("ghati") karmas, became a role-model
and leader for those seeking spiritual guidance. Tirthankaras revitalize Jain
Society by organisation of fourfold Jain Order consisting of monks, nuns,
laymen and laywomen. Jaina tradition identifies Rishabha (also known as
"Adinath") as the first tirthankar of this declining (avasarpini) time cycle
(kalachakra). The 24th, and last "Tirthankar" is Mahavira, who lived from 599
to 527 BCE. The 23rd Tirthankar, Parsva, lived from 877 to 777 BCE. The last
two Tirthankaras, Parshva and Mahavira, are historical figures whose existence
is recorded. The 24 Tirthankaras in chronological order are: Rishabha,
Ajitnath, Sambhavanath, Abhinandannath, Sumatinath, Padmaprabha, Suparshvanath,
Chandraprabha, Pushpadanta (Suvidhinath), Sheetalnath, Shreyansanath,
Vasupujya, Vimalnath, Anantnath, Dharmanath, Shantinath, Kunthunath, Aranath,
Mallinath, Munisuvrata, Naminatha, Neminath, Parshva and Mahavira (Vardhamana).
Festivals. Jain festivals are characterized by both internal and external
celebrations. The internal celebration is through praying (expressing devotion
to Jinas), practicing meditation, spiritual studies and renunciation. History.
Contemporary historians like Ram Prasad Chandra, Vilas Sangave, Heinrich
Zimmer, John Marshall, Thomas McEvilley, P.R. Deshmukh and Mircea Eliade are of
the opinion that there exists some link between the first Jain Tirthankar
Rishabha and the Indus valley civilization. Based on archeological and literary
evidence. P. C. Roychoudary puts the date of Rishabha at the end of the Stone
Age and the beginning of the Agriculture age. Ram Prasad Chanda, who supervised
Indus Valley Civilisation excavations, states that, “Not only the seated
deities on some of the Indus seals are in Yoga posture and bear witness to the
prevalence of Yoga in the Indus Valley Civilisation in that remote age, the
standing deities on the seals also show Kayotsarga (a standing or sitting
posture of meditation) position. The Kayotsarga posture is peculiarly Jain. It
is a posture not of sitting but of standing. In the Adi Purana Book XV III, the
Kayotsarga posture is described in connection with the penance of Rishabha”
Christopher Key Chappel also notes some other possible links with Jainism. Seal
420, unearthed at Mohenjodaro portrays a person with 3 or possibly 4 faces.
Jain iconography frequently depicts its Tirthankaras with four faces,
symbolizing their presence in all four directions. In addition, Depictions of a
bull appear repeatedly in the artifacts of the Indus Valley. Richard Lannoy,
Thomas McEvilley and Padmanabh Jaini have all suggested that the abundant use
of the bull image in the Indus Valley civilization indicates a link with
Rishabha, whose companion animal is the bull. According to scholars,
Parshvanath was a historical figure and lived in the 9th century BC. In the 6th
century BC, Vardhamana Mahavira became one of the most influential Jainism
teachers. He built up a large group of disciples that learned from his
teachings and followed him as he taught an ascetic doctrine in order to achieve
enlightenment. The disciples referred to him as Jina, which means "the
conqueror" and later his followers would use a derivation of this title to
refer to themselves as Jains, a follower of the Jina. It is generally accepted
that Jainism started spreading in south India from the 3rd century BC. i.e.
since the time when Badrabahu, a preacher of this religion and the head of the
monks' community, came to Karnataka from Bihar. Kalinga (modern Orissa) was
home to many Jains in the past. Rishabha, the first Tirthankar, was revered and
worshipped in the ancient city Pithunda, capital of Kalinga. This was destroyed
by Mahapadma Nanda when he conquered Kalinga and brought the statue of Rishabha
to his capital in Magadh. Rishabha is revered as the "Kalinga Jina". Ashoka's
invasion and his Buddhist policy also subjugated Jains greatly in Kalinga.
However, in the first century BCE Emperor Kharvela conquered Magadha and
brought Rishabha's statue back and installed it in Udaygiri, near his capital,
Shishupalgadh. The Khandagiri and Udaygiri caves near Bhubaneswar are the only
surviving stone Jain monuments in Orissa. Earlier buildings were made of wood
and were destroyed. Deciphering of the Brahmi script by James Prinsep in 1788
enabled the reading of ancient inscriptions in India and established the
antiquity of Jainism. The discovery of Jain manuscripts has added significantly
to retracing Jain history. Archaeologists have encountered Jain remains and
artifacts at Maurya, Sunga, Kishan, Gupta, Kalachuries, Rashtrakut, Chalukya,
Chandel and Rajput as well as later sites. Several western and Indian scholars
have contributed to the reconstruction of Jain history. Western historians like
Bühler, Jacobi, and Indian scholars like Iravatham Mahadevan, worked on Tamil
Brahmi inscriptions. Denominations.  The Jain "sangha" is divided into two
major sects, Digambara and Svetambara. The differences in belief between the
two sects are minor and relatively obscure. Digambara monks do not wear clothes
because they believe clothes, like other possessions, increase dependency and
desire for material things, and desire for anything ultimately leads to sorrow.
This also restricts full monastic life (and therefore moksa) to males as
Digambaras do not permit women to be nude; female renunciates wear white and
are referred to as "Aryika"s. Svetambara monastics, on the other hand, wear
white seamless clothes for practical reasons, and believe there is nothing in
the scriptures that condemns wearing clothes. Women are accorded full status as
renunciates and are often called "sadhvi", the feminine of the term often used
for male munis, "sadhu". Svetambaras believe women may attain liberation and
that Mallinath, a Tirthankara, was female. The earliest record of Digambara
beliefs is contained in the Prakrit "Suttapahuda" of the Digambara mendicant
Kundakunda (c. 2nd century AD). Digambaras believe that Mahavira remained
unmarried, whereas Svetambaras believe Mahavira married a woman who bore him a
daughter. The two sects also differ on the origin of Mata Trishala, Mahavira's
mother. Digambaras believe that only the first five lines are formally part of
the Namokar Mantra (the main Jain prayer), whereas Svetambaras believe all nine
form the mantra. Other differences are minor and not based on major points of
doctrine. Excavations at Mathura revealed many Jain statues from the time of
the Kushan Empire. Tirthankaras, represented without clothes, and monks with
cloth wrapped around the left arm are identified as Ardhaphalaka "half-clothed"
and mentioned in some texts. The Yapaniyas, believed to have originated from
the Ardhaphalaka, followed Digambara nudity, along with several Svetambara
beliefs. Svetambaras sub-sects include Sthanakavasi, Terapanthi, and
Murtipujaka. Some revering statues while other Jains are aniconic. Svetambaras
follow the 12 "agama" literature. Digambara sub-sects include Bisapanthi,
Kanjipanthi, Taranapanthi, Terapanthi and Srimadi. Most simply call themselves
Jains and follow general traditions rather than specific sectarian practices.
In 1974 a committee with representatives from every sect compiled a new text
called the Saman Suttam. Culture. Contributions to Indian culture. While Jains
represent less than 1% of the Indian constitution and population, their
contributions to culture and society in India are significant. Jainism had a
major influence in developing a system of philosophy and ethics that had a
great impact on all aspects of Indian culture. Scholarly research and evidences
have shown that philosophical concepts considered typically Indian—karma,
ahimsa, moksa, reincarnation and the like—were propagated and developed by
Jain teachers. Jains have also contributed to the culture and language of the
Indian states Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Gujarat and Rajasthan. Jain scholars and
poets authored Tamil classics of the Sangam period such as the Silappatikaram,
Civaka Cintamani, Manimekalai and Nālaṭiyār. In the beginning of the
medieval period, between the 9th and 13th centuries, Kannada authors were
predominantly of the Jain and Lingayati faiths. Jains were the earliest known
cultivators of Kannada literature, which they dominated until the 12th century.
Jains wrote about the Tirthankaras and other aspects of the faith. Adikavi
Pampa is one of the greatest Kannada poets of all time and was the court poet
of Chalukya king Arikesari, a Rashtrakuta feudatory, and is best known for his
"Vikramarjuna Vijaya". The works of Adikavi Pampa, Ponna and Ranna,
collectively called the "three gems of Kannada literature", heralded the age of
classical Kannada in the 10th century. The earliest known Gujarati text,
"Bharata-Bahubali Rasa", was written by a Jain monk. Some important people in
Gujarat's history were Acharya Hemachandra and his pupil, the Solanki ruler
Kumarpal. Jains are among the wealthiest Indians. They run numerous schools,
colleges and hospitals and are important patrons of the Somapuras, the
traditional temple architects in Gujarat. Jains have greatly influenced
Gujarati cuisine. Gujarat is predominantly vegetarian (see Jain vegetarianism),
and its food is mild as onions and garlic are omitted. Jains encourage their
monks to do research and obtain higher education. Jain monks and nuns,
particularly in Rajasthan, have published numerous research monographs. This is
unique among Indian religious groups. The 2001 census states that Jains are
India's most literate community and that India's oldest libraries at Patan and
Jaisalmer are preserved by Jain institutions. Literature. Jains have
contributed to India's classical and popular literature. For example, almost
all early Kannada literature and many Tamil works were written by Jains. The
oldest Jain literature is in Shauraseni and the Jain Prakrit (the Jain Agamas,
Agama-Tulya, the Siddhanta texts, etc.). Many classical texts are in Sanskrit
(Tattvartha Sutra, Puranas, Kosh, Sravakacara, mathematics, Nighantus etc.).
"Abhidhana Rajendra Kosha" written by Acharya Rajendrasuri, is only one
available Jain encyclopedia or Jain dictionary to understand the Jain Prakrit,
Sanskrit, Ardha-Magadhi and other languages, words, their use and references
within oldest Jain literature. Jain literature was written in Apabhraṃśa
(Kahas, rasas, and grammars), Standard Hindi (Chhahadhala, Moksh Marg
Prakashak, and others), Tamil (Nālaṭiyār, Civaka Cintamani, Valayapathi,
and others), and Kannada (Vaddaradhane and various other texts). Jain versions
of the Ramayana and Mahabharata are found in Sanskrit, the Prakrits,
Apabhraṃśa and Kannada. Jains literature exists mainly in Jain Prakrit,
Sanskrit, Marathi, Tamil, Rajasthani, Dhundari, Marwari, Hindi, Gujarati,
Kannada, Malayalam, Tulu and more recently in English. Canonical texts. The 14
Purvas, were a body of Jain scriptures that was preached by all Tirthankaras of
Jainism. These teachings was memorized and passed on through ages, but it
became fairly vulnerable and died off within 1,000 years after Lord Mahavira
nirvana(liberation) on account of effects of famine. Agamas are canonical texts
of Jainism based on Mahavira’s teachings. These Agamas are composed of 46
texts: Twelve Angās, Twelve Upanga āgamas, Six Chedasūtras, Four
Mūlasūtras, Ten Prakīrnaka sūtras and Two Cūlikasūtras. The digambara
sect of Jainism maintains that these Agams were too lost during that famine. In
the absence of authentic scriptures, Digambars use about 25 scriptures written
by great Acharyas for their religious practice. These include 2 main texts, 4
Pratham-Anuyog, 3 Charn-anuyoga, 4 Karan-anuyoga and 12 Dravya-anuyoga.
Constitutional status in India. In 2005 the Supreme Court of India declined to
issue a writ of "mandamus" towards granting Jains the status of a religious
minority throughout India. The Court noted that Jains have been declared a
minority in five states already, and left it to the rest of the States to
decide on the minority status of Jain religion. In 2006 the Indian Supreme
Court, in a judgment pertaining to an Indian state, opined that "Jain Religion
is indisputably not a part of the Hindu Religion". Jainism and other religions.
Jains are not a part of the Vedic Religion (Hinduism). Ancient India had two
philosophical streams of thought: The Shramana philosophical schools,
represented by Jainism movement, and the Brahmana/Vedic/Puranic schools
represented by Vedanta, Vaishnava and other movements. Both streams have
existed side by side for few thousands of years, influencing each other. The
Hindu scholar, Lokmanya Tilak credited Jainism with influencing Hinduism and
thus leading to the cessation of animal sacrifice in Vedic rituals. Bal
Gangadhar Tilak has described Jainism as the originator of Ahimsa and wrote in
a letter printed in Bombay Samachar, Mumbai:10 December 1904: "In ancient
times, innumerable animals were butchered in sacrifices. Evidence in support of
this is found in various poetic compositions such as the Meghaduta. "What could
have saved Indian society from the ponderous burden of omnifarious ritualistic
ceremonialism, with its animal and other sacrifices, which all but crushed the
very life of it, except the Jain revolution, which took its strong stand
exclusively on chaste morals and philosophical truths? Jains were the first
great ascetics and they did some great work. "Don't injure any and do good to
all that you can, and that is all the morality and ethics, and that is all the
work there is, and the rest is all nonsense." And then they went to work and
elaborated this one principle all through, and it is a most wonderful ideal:
how all that we call ethics they simply bring out from that one great principle
of non-injury and doing good."
