Judas Iscariot Judas Iscariot (, "Yehuda", ) was, according to the New
Testament, one of the Twelve Apostles of Jesus Christ. He is infamously known
for his kiss and betrayal of Jesus to the hands of the chief Sanhedrin priests
in exchange for a payment of 30 pieces of silver, after which he subsequently
hanged himself out of remorse and guilt. Etymology. In the Greek New Testament,
Judas is called Ιούδας Ισκάριωθ and Ισκαριώτης .
"Judas" (spelled "Ioudas" in ancient Greek and "Iudas" in Latin, pronounced
"yudas" in both) is the Greek form of the common name Judah (יהודה,
Yehûdâh, Hebrew for "God is praised"). The Greek spelling underlies other
names in the New Testament that are traditionally rendered differently in
English: Judah and Jude. Biblical narrative. Judas is mentioned in the synoptic
gospels, the Gospel of John and at the beginning of Acts of the Apostles. Mark
states that the chief priests were looking for a sly way to arrest Jesus. They
decided not to do so during the feast since they were afraid that people would
riot; instead, they chose the night before the feast to arrest him. In the
Gospel of Luke, Satan enters Judas at this time. According to the account in
the Gospel of John, Judas carried the disciples' money bag. He betrayed Jesus
for a bribe of "thirty pieces of silver" by identifying him with a kiss —
"the kiss of Judas" — to arresting soldiers of the High Priest Caiaphas, who
then turned Jesus over to Pontius Pilate's soldiers. Death. The existence of
conflicting accounts of the death of Judas caused problems for scholars who saw
them as threatening the reliability of Scripture. This problem was one of the
points causing C. S. Lewis, for example, to reject the view "that every
statement in Scripture must be historical truth". Various attempts at
harmonization have been suggested, such as that of Augustine that Judas hanged
himself in the field, and the rope eventually snapped and the fall burst his
body open, or that the accounts of Acts and Matthew refer to two different
transactions. Some modern scholars tend to reject these approaches stating that
the Matthew account is a midrashic exposition that allows the author to present
the event as a fulfillment of prophetic passages from the Old Testament. They
argue that the author adds imaginative details such as the thirty pieces of
silver, and the fact that Judas hangs himself, to an earlier tradition about
Judas' death. Matthew's reference to the death as fulfilment of a prophecy
"spoken through Jeremiah the prophet" caused controversy, since it paraphrases
a story from the Book of Zechariah which refers to the return of a payment of
thirty pieces of silver. Some writers, such as Jerome and John Calvin concluded
that this was an obvious error. Some modern writers suggest that the Gospel
writer may have had a passage from Jeremiah in mind, such as chapters and which
refers to a potter's jar and a burial place, and chapter which refers to a
burial place and an earthenware jar. Randel Helms wrote, " That Matthew 27v9
thinks the passage he is quoting comes from Jeremiah shows that he has departed
from his usual practice -especially when using Mark - of checking the accuracy
of his source's Old Testament reference. Matthew's source has blended
Jeremiah's buying of a field and placing the deed in a pot with Zechariah's
casting of thirty pieces of silver down in the temple and the purchase of the
Potter's Field. The story of Judas's actions after the betrayal is one of the
most revealing examples of the early Christians' fictional and imaginative use
of the Old Testament as a book about Jesus. " Theology. Betrayal of Jesus.
There are several explanations as to why Judas betrayed Jesus. A prevalent
explanation is that Judas betrayed Jesus for 30 pieces of silver (). One of
Judas's main weaknesses seemed to be money (). A possibility is that Judas
expected Jesus to overthrow Roman rule of Israel. In this view, Judas is a
disillusioned disciple betraying Jesus not so much because he loved money, but
because he loved his country and thought Jesus had failed it. According to and
, Satan entered into him and called him to do it. The Gospels suggest that
Jesus foresaw (, ) and allowed Judas's betrayal (). One explanation is that
Jesus allowed the betrayal because it would allow God's plan to be fulfilled.
Another is that regardless of the betrayal, Jesus was ultimately destined for
crucifixion. In April 2006, a Coptic papyrus manuscript titled the Gospel of
Judas from 200 AD was translated, suggesting that Jesus told Judas to betray
him, although some scholars question the translation. Origen knew of a
tradition according to which the greater circle of disciples betrayed Jesus,
but does not attribute this to Judas in particular, and Origen did not deem
Judas to be thoroughly corrupt (Matt., tract. xxxv). Judas is the subject of
philosophical writings, including "The Problem of Natural Evil" by Bertrand
Russell and "Three Versions of Judas", a short story by Jorge Luis Borges. They
allege various problematic ideological contradictions with the discrepancy
between Judas's actions and his eternal punishment. John S. Feinberg argues
that if Jesus foresees Judas's betrayal, then the betrayal is not an act of
free will, and therefore should not be punishable. Conversely, it is argued
that just because the betrayal was foretold, it does not prevent Judas from
exercising his own free will in this matter. Other scholars argue that Judas
acted in obedience to God's will. The gospels suggest that Judas is apparently
bound up with the fulfillment of God's purposes (, , , , , , ), yet "woe is
upon him", and he would "have been better unborn" (). The difficulty inherent
in the saying is its paradoxicality: if Judas had not been born, the Son of Man
will apparently no longer go ""as it is written of him"." The consequence of
this apologetic approach is that Judas's actions come to be seen as necessary
and unavoidable, yet leading to condemnation. Erasmus believed that Judas was
free to change his intention, but Martin Luther argued in rebuttal that Judas's
will was immutable. John Calvin states that Judas was predestined to damnation,
but writes on the question of Judas's guilt: ""surely in Judas' betrayal, it
will be no more right, because God himself willed that his son be delivered up
and delivered him up to death, to ascribe the guilt of the crime to God than to
transfer the credit for redemption to Judas."" It is speculated that Judas's
damnation, which seems possible from the Gospels' text, may not stem from his
betrayal of Christ, but from the despair which caused him to subsequently
commit suicide. This position is not without its problems since Judas was
already damned by Jesus even before he committed suicide (see ), but it does
avoid the paradox of Judas's predestined act setting in motion both the
salvation of all mankind and his own damnation. The damnation of Judas is not a
universal conclusion, and some have argued that there is no indication that
Judas was condemned with eternal punishment. Others argue Judas had the free
will to accept or reject Christ anytime before his death. Adam Clarke writes:
""he committed a heinous act of sin...but he repented () and did what he could
to undo his wicked act: he had committed the sin unto death, i.e. a sin that
involves the death of the body; but who can say, (if mercy was offered to
Christ's murderers? ()...) that the same mercy could not be extended to
wretched Judas?..."" Modern interpretations. Most Christians still consider
Judas a traitor. Indeed the term "Judas" has entered many languages as a
synonym for "betrayer". American philosopher Will Durant argues that the early
Church would never create material that only embarrassed the followers of
Jesus, or weakened its position with opponents (in this case, a traitor
apostle). Some have embraced the alternative notion that Judas was merely the
negotiator in a prearranged prisoner exchange (following the money-changer riot
in the Temple) that gave Jesus to the Roman authorities by mutual agreement,
and that Judas's later portrayal as "traitor" was a historical distortion. In
his book "The Passover Plot" the British theologian Hugh J. Schonfield argues
that the crucifixion of Christ was a conscious re-enactment of Biblical
prophecy and Judas acted with Jesus' full knowledge and consent in "betraying"
his master to the authorities. Theologian Aaron Saari contends in his work "The
Many Deaths of Judas Iscariot" that Judas Iscariot was the literary invention
of the Markan community. As Judas does not appear in the Epistles of Paul, nor
in the Q Gospel, Saari argues that the language indicates a split between
Pauline Christians, who saw no reason for the establishment of an organized
Church, and the followers of Peter. Saari contends that the denigration of
Judas in Matthew and Luke-Acts has a direct correlation to the elevation of
Peter. Further evidence of the absence of the Judas story in the earliest
Christian documents is drawn on the basis of and . Here Jesus tells his
disciples that they will “sit on the twelve thrones judging the twelve tribes
of Israel.” No exception is made for Judas even though Jesus was aware of his
impending act of betrayal. The answer may lie in the fact that the source of
these verses could be the hypothetical Q document (QS 62). Q is thought to
predate the gospels and would be one of the earliest Christian documents. Given
that possibility, the betrayal story could have been invented by the writer of
Mark. The book "The Sins of the Scripture", by John Shelby Spong, investigates
the possibility that early Christians compiled the Judas story from three Old
Testament Jewish betrayal stories. He writes, "...the act of betrayal by a
member of the twelve disciples is not found in the earliest Christian writings.
Judas is first placed into the Christian story by the Gospel of Mark (3:19),
who wrote in the early years of the eighth decade of the Common Era." He points
out that some of the Gospels, after the Crucifixion, refer to the number of
Disciples as "Twelve", as if Judas were still among them. He compares the three
conflicting descriptions of Judas's death — hanging, leaping into a pit, and
disemboweling — with three Old Testament betrayals followed by similar
suicides. Spong's conclusion is that early Bible authors, after the First
Jewish-Roman War, sought to distance themselves from Rome's enemies. They
augmented the Gospels with a story of a disciple, personified in Judas as the
Jewish state, who either betrayed or handed over Jesus to his Roman crucifiers.
Spong identifies this augmentation with the origin of modern Anti-Semitism.
Jewish scholar Hyam Maccoby, suggests that in the New Testament, the name
"Judas" was constructed as an attack on the Judaeans or on the Judaean
religious establishment held responsible for executing Christ. The English word
"Jew" is derived from the Latin "Iudaeus", which, like the Greek
Ιουδαίος ("Ioudaios"), could also mean "Judaean". Role in apocrypha.
Judas has been a figure of great interest to esoteric groups, such as many
Gnostic sects. Irenaeus records the beliefs of one Gnostic sect, the Cainites,
who believed that Judas was an instrument of the Sophia, Divine Wisdom, thus
earning the hatred of the Demiurge. In the Hebrew Bible, the book of Zechariah,
the one who casts thirty pieces of silver, as Judas does in the Gospels, is a
servant of God. His betrayal of Jesus thus was a victory over the materialist
world. The Cainites later split into two groups, disagreeing over the ultimate
significance of Jesus in their cosmology. Gospel of Judas. During the 1970s, a
Coptic papyrus codex (book) was discovered near Beni Masah, Egypt which
appeared to be a 3rd- or 4th-century-AD copy of a 2nd-century original,
describing the story of Jesus's death from the viewpoint of Judas. At its
conclusion, the text identifies itself as "the Gospel of Judas" ("Euangelion
Ioudas"). The discovery was given dramatic international exposure in April 2006
when the US "National Geographic" magazine (for its May edition) published a
feature article entitled "The Gospel of Judas" with images of the fragile codex
and analytical commentary by relevant experts and interested observers (but not
a comprehensive translation). The article's introduction stated: "An ancient
text lost for 1,700 years says Christ's betrayer was his truest disciple". The
article points to some evidence that the original document was extant in the
2nd century: "Around A.D. 180, Irenaeus, Bishop of Lyon in what was then Roman
Gaul, wrote a massive treatise called "Against Heresies" which he attacked a
'fictitious history,' which 'they style the Gospel of Judas.'" Before the
magazine's edition was circulated, other news media gave exposure to the story,
abridging and selectively reporting it. In December 2007, a "New York Times"
op-ed article by April DeConick asserted that the "National Geographic"'s
translation is badly flawed: For example, in one instance the "National
Geographic" transcription refers to Judas as a "daimon", which the society’s
experts have translated as "spirit". However, the universally accepted word for
"spirit" is "pneuma" — in Gnostic literature "daimon" is always taken to mean
"demon". The National Geographic Society responded that "Virtually all issues
April D. DeConick raises about translation choices are addressed in footnotes
in both the popular and critical editions". In a later review of the issues and
relevant publications, critic Joan Acocella questioned whether ulterior
intentions had not begun to supersede historical analysis, e.g., whether
publication of "The Gospel of Judas" could be an attempt to roll back ancient
anti-semitic imputations. She concluded that the ongoing clash between
scriptural fundamentalism and attempts at revision were childish because of the
unreliability of the sources. Therefore, she argued, "People interpret, and
cheat. The answer is not to fix the Bible but to fix ourselves." Other scholars
have questioned the initial translation and interpretation of the "Gospel of
Judas" by the National Geographic team of experts. Gospel of Barnabas.
According to medieval copies (the earliest copies from the 15th century) of the
Gospel of Barnabas it was Judas, not Jesus, who was crucified on the cross.
This work states that Judas's appearance was transformed to that of Jesus',
when the former, out of betrayal, led the Roman soldiers to arrest Jesus who by
then was ascended to the heavens. This transformation of appearance was so
identical that the masses, followers of Christ, and even the Mother of Jesus,
Mary, initially thought that the one arrested and crucified was Jesus himself.
The gospel then mentions that after three days since burial, Judas's body was
stolen from his grave, and then the rumors spread of Jesus being risen from the
dead. When Jesus was informed in the third heaven about what happened, he
prayed to God to be sent back to the earth, and descended and gathered his
mother, disciples, and followers, and told them the truth of what happened. He
then ascended back to the heavens, and will come back at the end of times as a
just king. Representations and symbolism. The term "Judas" has entered many
languages as a synonym for "betrayer", and Judas has become the archetype of
the traitor in Western art and literature. Judas is given some role in
virtually all literature telling the Passion story, and appears in a number of
modern novels and movies. In the Eastern Orthodox hymns of Holy Wednesday (the
Wednesday before Pascha), Judas is contrasted with the woman who anointed Jesus
with expensive perfume and washed his feet with her tears. According to the
Gospel of John, Judas protested at this apparent extravagance, suggesting that
the money spent on it should have been given to the poor. After this, Judas
went to the chief priests and offered to betray Jesus for money. The hymns of
Holy Wednesday contrast these two figures, encouraging believers to avoid the
example of the fallen disciple and instead to imitate Mary's example of
repentance. Also, Wednesday is observed as a day of fasting from meat, dairy
products, and olive oil throughout the year in memory of the betrayal of Judas.
The prayers of preparation for receiving the Eucharist also make mention of
Judas's betrayal: "I will not reveal your mysteries to your enemies, neither
like Judas will I betray you with a kiss, but like the thief on the cross I
will confess you." Judas Iscariot is often represented with red hair in Spanish
culture and by William Shakespeare. The practice is comparable to the
Renaissance portrayal of Jews with red hair, which was then regarded as a
negative trait and which may have been used to correlate Judas Iscariot with
contemporary Jews. Art and literature. Judas has become the archetype of the
betrayer in Western culture, with some role in virtually all literature telling
the Passion story.
