Kabbalah Kabbalah, also spelled Kabala or QabbƒÅl√¢ ( literally "receiving"),
is an esoteric method, discipline and school of thought. Its definition varies
according to the tradition and aims of those following it, from its religious
origin as an integral part of Judaism, to its later Christian, New Age, or
Occultist syncretic adaptions. Kabbalah is a set of esoteric teachings meant to
explain the relationship between an unchanging, eternal and mysterious Ein Sof
(no end) and the mortal and finite universe (his creation). While it is heavily
used by some denominations, it is not a religious denomination in itself.
Inside Judaism, it forms the foundations of mystical religious interpretation.
Outside Judaism, its scriptures are read outside the traditional canons of
organised religion. Kabbalah seeks to define the nature of the universe and the
human being, the nature and purpose of existence, and various other ontological
questions. It also presents methods to aid understanding of these concepts and
to thereby attain spiritual realisation. Kabbalah originally developed entirely
within the realm of Jewish thought and kabbalists often use classical Jewish
sources to explain and demonstrate its esoteric teachings. These teachings are
thus held by followers in Judaism to define the inner meaning of both the
Hebrew Bible and traditional Rabbinic literature, their formerly concealed
transmitted dimension, as well as to explain the significance of Jewish
religious observances. Traditional practitioners believe its earliest origins
pre-date world religions, forming the primordial blueprint for Creation's
philosophies, religions, sciences, arts and political systems. Historically,
Kabbalah emerged, after earlier forms of Jewish mysticism, in 12th- to 13th-
century Southern France and Spain, becoming reinterpreted in the Jewish
mystical renaissance of 16th-century Ottoman Palestine. It was popularised in
the form of Hasidic Judaism from the 18th century onwards. 20th-century
interest in Kabbalah has inspired cross-denominational Jewish renewal and
contributed to wider non-Jewish contemporary spirituality, as well as engaging
its flourishing emergence and historical re-emphasis through newly established
academic investigation. Overview. According to the Zohar, a foundational text
for kabbalistic thought, Torah study can proceed along four levels of
interpretation (exegesis). These four levels are called "pardes" from their
initial letters (PRDS , orchard). Kabbalah is considered by its followers as a
necessary part of the study of Torah ‚Äì the study of Torah (the Tanakh and
Rabbinic literature) being an inherent duty of observant Jews. Kabbalah teaches
doctrines that are accepted by some Jews as the true meaning of Judaism while
other Jews have rejected these doctrines as heretical and antithetical to
Judaism. After the Medieval Kabbalah, and especially after its 16th-century
development and synthesis, Kabbalah replaced Jewish philosophy ("hakira") as
the mainstream traditional Jewish theology, both in scholarly circles and in
the popular imagination. With the arrival of modernity, through the influence
of "haskalah", this has changed among non-Orthodox Jewish denominations,
although its 20th-century academic study and cross-denominational spiritual
applications (especially through Neo-Hasidism) has reawakened a following
beyond Orthodoxy. The origins of the term "kabbalah" are unknown and disputed
to belong either to Jewish philosopher Solomon ibn Gabirol (1021‚Äì1058) or
else to the 13th-century Spanish kabbalist Bahya ben Asher. While other terms
have been used in many religious documents from the 2nd century up to the
present day, the term "kabbalah" has become the main descriptive of Jewish
esoteric knowledge and practices. Jewish mystical literature, which served as
the basis for the development of kabbalistic thought, developed through a
theological tradition inherent in Judaism from Antiquity, as part of wider
Rabbinic literature. Its theoretical development can be characterised in
alternative schools and successive stages. After the Hebrew Bible experience of
prophecy, the first documented schools of specifically mystical theory and
method in Judaism are found in the 1st-2nd centuries, described in the
"heichalot" (supernal "palaces") texts and the earliest existent book on Jewish
esotericism, "Sefer Yetzirah". Their method, known as "Merkabah" (contemplation
of the Divine "Chariot") mysticism lasted until the 10th century, where it was
subsumed by the Medieval doctrinal emergence of the Kabbalah in south-western
Europe in the 12th-13th centuries. Its teachings, embodied in the "Zohar",
became the foundation of later Jewish mysticism, becoming re-interpreted in the
early-modern developments of 16th-century Safed in the Galilee, through the new
system of Isaac Luria. Lurianic Kabbalah became popularised as a social
mysticism for the whole Jewish community through 18th-century Hasidism in
eastern Europe, and its new notions of mystical leadership. According to
traditional belief, early kabbalistic knowledge was transmitted orally by the
Patriarchs, prophets, and sages (hakhamim in Hebrew), eventually to be
"interwoven" into Jewish religious writings and culture. According to this
view, early kabbalah was, in around the 10th century BC, an open knowledge
practiced by over a million people in ancient Israel. Foreign conquests drove
the Jewish spiritual leadership of the time (the Sanhedrin) to hide the
knowledge and make it secret, fearing that it might be misused if it fell into
the wrong hands. The Sanhedrin leaders were also concerned that the practice of
kabbalah by Jews of the Jewish diaspora, unsupervised and unguided by the
masters, might lead them into wrong practice and forbidden ways. As a result,
the kabbalah became secretive, forbidden and esoteric to Judaism ("Torat
Ha‚ÄôSod" ) for two and a half millennia. It is hard to clarify with any degree
of certainty the exact concepts within kabbalah. There are several different
schools of thought with very different outlooks; however, all are accepted as
correct. Modern halakhic authorities have tried to narrow the scope and
diversity within kabbalah, by restricting study to certain texts, notably Zohar
and the teachings of Isaac Luria as passed down through Hayyim ben Joseph
Vital. However even this qualification does little to limit the scope of
understanding and expression, as included in those works are commentaries on
Abulafian writings, "Sefer Yetzirah", Albotonian writings, and the "Berit
Menuhah", which is known to the kabbalistic elect and which, as described more
recently by Gershom Scholem, combined ecstatic with theosophical mysticism. It
is therefore important to bear in mind when discussing things such as the
"sefirot" and their interactions that one is dealing with highly abstract
concepts that at best can only be understood intuitively. History of Jewish
mysticism. Origins of Judaic mysticism. According to the traditional
understanding, Kabbalah dates from Eden. It came down from a remote past as a
revelation to elect Tzadikim (righteous people), and, for the most part, was
preserved only by a privileged few. Talmudic Judaism records its view of the
proper protocol for teaching this wisdom, as well as many of its concepts, in
the "Talmud", Tractate "Hagigah", Ch.2. Contemporary scholarship suggests that
various schools of Jewish esotericism arose at different periods of Jewish
history, each reflecting not only prior forms of mysticism, but also the
intellectual and cultural milieu of that historical period. Answers to
questions of transmission, lineage, influence, and innovation vary greatly and
cannot be easily summarized. Origins of terms. Originally, Kabbalistic
knowledge was believed to be an integral part of the Judaism's oral law (see
also Aggadah), given by God to Moses on Mount Sinai around 13th century BCE,
though there is a view that Kabbalah began with Adam. When the Israelites
arrived at their destination and settled in Canaan, for a few centuries the
esoteric knowledge was referred to by its aspect practice‚Äîmeditation
Hitbonenut (), Rebbe Nachman of Breslov's Hitbodedut (), translated as "being
alone" or "isolating oneself", or by a different term describing the actual,
desired goal of the practice‚Äîprophecy (""NeVu‚Äôa"" ). During the 5th century
BCE, when the works of the Tanakh were edited and canonized and the secret
knowledge encrypted within the various writings and scrolls ("Megilot"), the
knowledge was referred to as "Ma'aseh Merkavah" () and "Ma'aseh B'reshit" (),
respectively "the act of the Chariot" and "the act of Creation". Merkavah
mysticism alluded to the encrypted knowledge within the book of the prophet
Ezekiel describing his vision of the "Divine Chariot". B'reshit mysticism
referred to the first chapter of Genesis () in the Torah that is believed to
contain secrets of the creation of the universe and forces of nature. These
terms are also mentioned in the second chapter of the Talmudic tractate
"Haggigah". Mystic elements of the Torah. According to adherents of Kabbalah,
its origin begins with secrets that God revealed to Adam. According to a
rabbinic midrash God created the universe through the Ten Sefirot. When read by
later generations of Kabbalists, the "Torah"'s description of the creation in
the Book of Genesis reveals mysteries about the godhead itself, the true nature
of Adam and Eve, the Garden of Eden, the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil and
the Tree of Life, as well as the interaction of these supernal entities with
the Serpent which leads to disaster when they eat the forbidden fruit, as
recorded in Genesis 3. The Bible provides ample additional material for mythic
and mystical speculation. The prophet Ezekiel's visions in particular attracted
much mystical speculation, as did Isaiah's Temple vision‚Äî"Isaiah", Ch.6.
Jacob's vision of the ladder to heaven provided another example of esoteric
experience. Moses' encounters with the Burning bush and God on Mount Sinai are
evidence of mystical events in the Tanakh that form the origin of Jewish
mystical beliefs. The 72 letter name of God which is used in Jewish mysticism
for meditation purposes is derived from the Hebrew verbal utterance Moses spoke
in the presence of an angel, while the Sea of Reeds parted, allowing the
Hebrews to escape their approaching attackers. The miracle of the Exodus, which
led to Moses receiving the Ten Commandments and the Jewish Orthodox view of the
acceptance of the Torah at Mount Sinai, preceded the creation of the first
Jewish nation approximately three hundred years before King Saul. Mystical
doctrines in the Talmudic era. In early rabbinic Judaism (the early centuries
of the first millennium CE), the terms "Ma'aseh Bereshit" ("Works of Creation")
and "Ma'aseh Merkabah" ("Works of the Divine Throne/Chariot") clearly indicate
the Midrashic nature of these speculations; they are really based upon Genesis
1 and Book of Ezekiel 1:4‚Äì28; while the names "Sitrei Torah" (Hidden aspects
of the Torah) (Talmud "Hag." 13a) and "Razei Torah" (Torah secrets) ("Ab." vi.
1) indicate their character as secret lore. An additional term also expanded
Jewish esoteric knowledge, namely "Chochmah Nistara" (Hidden wisdom). In
notable readings of this legend, only Rabbi Akiba was fit to handle the study
of mystical doctrines. The "Tosafot", medieval commentaries on the Talmud, say
that the four sages "did not go up literally, but it appeared to them as if
they went up". On the other hand, Rabbi Louis Ginzberg, writes in the "Jewish
Encyclopedia" (1901‚Äì1906) that the journey to paradise "is to be taken
literally and not allegorically". For further analysis, see The Four Who
Entered Paradise. Maimonides interprets "pardes" as physics and not mysticism.
Pre-Kabbalistic schools. The mystical methods and doctrines of Hekhalot
(Heavenly "Chambers") and Merkabah (Divine "Chariot") texts, named by modern
scholars from these repeated motifs, lasted from the 1st century BCE through to
the 10th century, before giving way to the documented manuscript emergence of
Kabbalah. Initiates were said to "descend the chariot", possibly a reference to
internal introspection on the Heavenly journey through the spiritual realms.
The ultimate aim was to arrive before the transcendent awe, rather than
nearness, of the Divine. From the 8th‚Äì11th centuries, "Sefer Yetzirah" and
Hekhalot texts made their way into European Jewish circles. Another, separate
influential mystical movement, shortly before the arrival there of Kabbalistic
theory, was the "Hasidei Ashkenaz" (◊ó◊°◊ô◊ì◊ô ◊ê◊©◊õ◊ ◊ñ) or Medieval German
Pietists from 1150-1250. This ethical-ascetic movement arose mostly among a
single scholarly family, the Kalonymus family of the French and German
Rhineland. Medieval emergence of the Kabbalah. Modern scholars have identified
several mystical brotherhoods that functioned in Europe starting in the 12th
century. Some, such as the "Iyyun Circle" and the "Unique Cherub Circle", were
truly esoteric, remaining largely anonymous. There were certain rishonim
("Elder Sages") of exoteric Judaism who are known to have been experts in
Kabbalah. One of the best known is Nahmanides (the "Ramban") (1194‚Äì1270)
whose commentary on the Torah is considered to be based on Kabbalistic
knowledge. Bahya ben Asher (the "Rabbeinu Behaye") (d. 1340) also combined
Torah commentary and Kabbalah. Another was Isaac the Blind (1160‚Äì1235), the
teacher of Nahmanides, who is widely argued to have written the first work of
classic Kabbalah, the "Bahir". "Sefer Bahir" and another work, the "Treatise of
the Left Emanation", probably composed in Spain by Isaac ben Isaac ha-Kohen,
laid the groundwork for the composition of "Sefer Zohar", written by Moses de
Leon and his mystical circle at the end of the 13th century, but credited to
the Talmudic sage Shimon bar Yochai, cf. Zohar. The Zohar proved to be the
first truly "popular" work of Kabbalah, and the most influential. From the 13th
century onward, Kabbalah began to be widely disseminated and it branched out
into an extensive literature. Historians in the 19th century, for example,
Heinrich Graetz, argued that the emergence into public view of Jewish
esotericism at this time coincides with, and represents a response to, the
rising influence of the rationalist philosophy of Maimonides and his followers.
Gershom Scholem sought to undermine this view as part of his resistance to
seeing Kabbalah as merely a response to medieval Jewish rationalism. Arguing
for a gnostic influence has to be seen as part of this strategy. More recently,
Moshe Idel and Elliot Wolfson have independently argued that the impact of
Maimonides can be seen in the change from orality to writing in the 13th
century. That is, Kabbalists committed to writing many of their oral traditions
in part as a response to the attempt of Maimonides to explain the older
esoteric subjects philosophically. Many Orthodox Jews reject the idea that
Kabbalah underwent significant historical development or change such as has
been proposed above. After the composition known as the Zohar was presented to
the public in the 13th century, the term "Kabbalah" began to refer more
specifically to teachings derived from, or related, to the "Zohar". At an even
later time, the term began to generally be applied to Zoharic teachings as
elaborated upon by Isaac Luria Arizal. Historians generally date the start of
Kabbalah as a major influence in Jewish thought and practice with the
publication of the Zohar and climaxing with the spread of the Arizal's
teachings. The majority of Haredi Jews accept the Zohar as the representative
of the "Ma'aseh Merkavah" and "Ma'aseh B'reshit" that are referred to in
Talmudic texts. Early Modern era: Lurianic Kabbalah. Following the upheavals
and dislocations in the Jewish world as a result of the Spanish Inquisition,
the expulsion of the Jews from Spain in 1492, and the trauma of anti-semitism
during the Middle Ages, Jews began to search for signs of when the long-awaited
Jewish Messiah would come to comfort them in their painful exiles. Moses
Cordovero and his immediate circle popularized the teachings of the Zohar which
had until then been only a modestly influential work. The author of the
"Shulkhan Arukh" (the Jewish "Code of Law"), Rabbi Yosef Karo (1488‚Äì1575),
was also a great scholar of Kabbalah and spread its teachings during this era.
As part of that "search for meaning" in their lives, kabbalah received its
biggest boost in the Jewish world with the explication of the kabbalistic
teachings of Rabbi Isaac Luria (1534‚Äì1572) by his disciples Rabbi Hayim Vital
and Rabbi Israel Sarug, both of whom published Luria's teachings (in variant
forms) gaining them widespread popularity. Luria's teachings came to rival the
influence of the Zohar and Luria stands, alongside Moses de Leon, as the most
influential mystic in Jewish history. Ban on studying Kabbalah. The ban on
studying Kabbalah was lifted by the efforts of the 16th-century kabbalist Rabbi
Avraham Azulai (1570‚Äì1643). The question, however, is whether the ban ever
existed in the first place. Concerning the above quote by Avraham Azulai, it
has found many versions in English, another is this The lines concerning the
year 1490 are also missing from the Hebrew edition of "Hesed L'Avraham", the
source work that both of these quote from. Furthermore, by Azulai's view the
ban was lifted thirty years before his birth, a time that would have
corresponded with Haim Vital's publication of the teaching of Isaac Luria.
Moshe Isserles understood there to be only a minor restriction, in his words,
"One's belly must be full of meat and wine, discerning between the prohibited
and the permitted." He is supported by the Bier Hetiv, the Pithei Teshuva as
well as the Vilna Gaon. The Vilna Gaon says, "There was never any ban or
enactment restricting the study of the wisdom of Kabbalah. Any who says there
is has never studied Kabbalah, has never seen PaRDeS, and speaks as an
ignoramous." Sefardi and Mizrahi. The kabbalah of the Sefardi (Portuguese or
Spanish) and Mizrahi (Middle East, North Africa, and the Caucasus) Torah
scholars has a long history. Kabbalah in various forms was widely studied,
commented upon, and expanded by North African, Turkish, Yemenite, and Asian
scholars from the 16th century onward. It flourished among Sefardic Jews in
Tzfat (Safed), Israel even before the arrival of Isaac Luria. Yosef Karo,
author of the "Shulchan Arukh" was part of the Tzfat school of kabbalah. Shlomo
Alkabetz, author of the hymn "Lekhah Dodi", taught there. His disciple Moses
ben Jacob Cordovero authored "Pardes Rimonim", an organized, exhaustive
compilation of kabbalistic teachings on a variety of subjects up to that point.
Cordovero headed the academy of Tzfat until his death, when Isaac Luria rose to
prominence. Rabbi Moshe's disciple Eliyahu De Vidas authored the classic work,
"Reishit Chochma", combining kabbalistic and "mussar" (moral) teachings. Chaim
Vital also studied under Cordovero, but with the arrival of Luria became his
main disciple. Vital claimed to be the only one authorized to transmit the
Ari's teachings, though other disciples also published books presenting Luria's
teachings. "Maharal". One of the most important teachers of kabbalah was Judah
Loew ben Bezalel (1525‚Äì1609) known as the "Maharal of Prague". Many of his
written works survive and are studied for their deep kabbalistic insights. The
Maharal is, perhaps, most famous outside of Jewish mysticism for the legends of
the golem of Prague, which he reportedly created. During the 20th century,
Isaac Hutner (1906‚Äì1980) continued to spread the Maharal's teachings
indirectly through his own teachings and scholarly publications within the
yeshiva world. Sabbatian mysticism. The spiritual and mystical yearnings of
many Jews remained frustrated after the death of Isaac Luria and his disciples
and colleagues. No hope was in sight for many following the devastation and
mass killings of the pogroms that followed in the wake the Chmielnicki Uprising
(1648‚Äì1654), and it was at this time that a controversial scholar of the
kabbalah by the name of Sabbatai Zevi (1626‚Äì1676) captured the hearts and
minds of the Jewish masses of that time with the promise of a newly minted
"Messianic" Millennialism in the form of his own personage. His charisma,
mystical teachings that included repeated pronunciations of the holy
Tetragrammaton in public, tied to an unstable personality, and with the help of
his own "prophet", Nathan of Gaza, convinced the Jewish masses that the Jewish
Messiah had finally come. It seemed that the esoteric teachings of kabbalah had
found their "champion" and had triumphed, but this era of Jewish history
unravelled when Zevi became an apostate to Judaism by converting to Islam after
he was arrested by the Ottoman Sultan and threatened with execution for
attempting a plan to conquer the world and rebuild the Temple in Jerusalem.
Many of his followers, known as Sabbatians, continued to worship him in secret,
explaining his conversion not as an effort to save his life but to recover the
sparks of the holy in each religion, and most leading rabbis were always on
guard to root them out. The Donmeh movement in modern Turkey is a surviving
remnant of the Sabbatian schism. Due to the chaos caused in the Jewish world,
the Rabbinic prohibition against studying kabbalah established itself firmly
within the Jewish religion. One of the conditions allowing a man to study and
engage himself in the kabbalah was to be of age forty. This age requirement
came about during this period and is not Talmudic in origin but Rabbinic. Many
Jews are familiar with this ruling, but are not aware of its origins. Moreover,
the prohibition is not halakhic in nature. According to Moses Cordovero,
halakhically, one must be of age twenty to engage in the kabbalah. Many famous
kabbalists, including the ARI, Rabbi Nachman of Breslov, Yehuda Ashlag, were
younger than twenty when they began. Frankism. The Sabbatian movement was
followed by that of the Frankists who were disciples of Jacob Frank
(1726‚Äì1791) who eventually became an apostate to Judaism by apparently
converting to Catholicism. This era of disappointment did not stem the Jewish
masses' yearnings for "mystical" leadership. Modern era traditional Kabbalah.
Rabbi Moshe Chaim Luzzatto (1707‚Äì1746), based in Italy, was a precocious
Talmudic scholar who arrived at the conclusion that there was a need for the
public teaching and study of kabbalah. He established a yeshiva for kabbalah
study and actively recruited students and, in addition, wrote copious
manuscripts in an appealing clear Hebrew style, all of which gained the
attention of both admirers and rabbinical critics who feared another "Shabbetai
Zevi (false messiah) in the making". He was forced to close his school by his
rabbinical opponents, hand over and destroy many of his most precious
unpublished kabbalistic writings, and go into exile in the Netherlands. He
eventually moved to the Land of Israel. Some of his most important works, such
as "Derekh Hashem", survive and are used as a gateway to the world of Jewish
mysticism. Rabbi Elijah of Vilna (Vilna Gaon) (1720‚Äì1797), based in
Lithuania, had his teachings encoded and publicized by his disciples such as by
Rabbi Chaim Volozhin who published the mystical-ethical work "Nefesh HaChaim"
[http://www.amazon.com/The-Soul-Life-Complete-Ha-chayyim/dp/061569991X ].
However, he was staunchly opposed to the new Hasidic movement and warned
against their public displays of religious fervour inspired by the mystical
teachings of their rabbis. Although the Vilna Gaon was not in favor of the
Hasidic movement, he did not prohibit the study and engagement in the kabbalah.
This is evident from his writings in the "Even Shlema". "He that is able to
understand secrets of the Torah and does not try to understand them will be
judged harshly, may God have mercy". (The Vilna Gaon, Even Shlema, 8:24). "The
Redemption will only come about through learning Torah, and the essence of the
Redemption depends upon learning Kabbalah" (The Vilna Gaon, Even Shlema, 11:3).
Among the Oriental tradition of kabbalah, Shalom Sharabi (1720‚Äì1777) from
Yemen was a major esoteric clarifier of the works of the Ari. The Beit El
Synagogue, "yeshivah of the kabbalists", which he came to head, was one of the
few communities to bring Lurianic meditation into communal prayer. In the 20th
century, Yehuda Ashlag (1885‚Äî1954) in Mandate Palestine, was a leading
esoteric kabbalist in the traditional mode, who translated the Zohar into
Hebrew with a new approach in Lurianic kabbalah. Hasidic Judaism. Rebbe Nachman
of Breslov (1772‚Äì1810), the great-grandson of the Baal Shem Tov, revitalized
and further expanded the latter's teachings, amassing a following of thousands
in Ukraine, Belarus, Lithuania and Poland. In a unique amalgam of Hasidic and
"Mitnagid" approaches, Rebbe Nachman emphasized study of both kabbalah and
serious Torah scholarship to his disciples. His teachings also differed from
the way other Hasidic groups were developing, as he rejected the idea of
hereditary Hasidic dynasties and taught that each Hasid must "search for the
"tzaddik" ('saintly/righteous person')" for himself and within himself. The
Habad-Lubavitch intellectual school of Hasidism broke away from General-
Hasidism's emotional faith orientation, by making the mind central as the route
to the internal heart. Its texts combine Jewish rational investigation with
explanation of Kabbalah through articulating unity in a common Divine essence.
In recent times, the messianic element latent in Hasidism has come to the fore
in Habad. 20th century influence. Jewish mysticism has influenced the thought
of some major Jewish theologians in the 20th century, outside of Kabbalistic or
Hasidic traditions. The first Chief Rabbi of Mandate Palestine, Abraham Isaac
Kook was a mystical thinker who drew heavily on Kabbalistic notions through his
own poetic terminology. His writings are concerned with fusing the false
divisions between sacred and secular, rational and mystical, legal and
imaginative. Students of Joseph B. Soloveitchik, figurehead of American Modern
Orthodox Judaism have read the influence of Kabbalistic symbols in his
philosophical works. Neo-Hasidism, rather than Kabbalah, shaped Martin Buber's
philosophy of dialogue and Abraham Joshua Heschel's Conservative Judaism.
Lurianic symbols of Tzimtzum and Shevirah have informed Holocaust theologians.
Concepts. Concealed and Revealed God. The nature of the Divine prompted
kabbalists to envision two aspects to God: (a) God in essence, absolutely
transcendent, unknowable, limitless Divine simplicity, and (b) God in
manifestation, the revealed persona of God through which He creates and
sustains and relates to mankind. Kabbalists speak of the first as "Ein/Ayn Sof"
(◊ê◊ô◊ü ◊°◊ï◊£ "the infinite/endless", literally "that which has no limits").
Of the impersonal Ein Sof nothing can be grasped. The second aspect of Divine
emanations, however, are accessible to human perception, dynamically
interacting throughout spiritual and physical existence, reveal the Divine
immanently, and are bound up in the life of man. Kabbalists believe that these
two aspects are not contradictory but complement one another, emanations
revealing the concealed mystery from within the Godhead. The structure of
emanations has been characterized in various ways: Sefirot (Divine attributes)
and Partzufim (Divine "faces"), Ohr (spiritual light and flow), Names of God
and the supernal Torah, Olamot (Spiritual Worlds), a Divine Tree and Archetypal
Man, Angelic Chariot and Palaces, male and female, enclothed layers of reality,
inwardly holy vitality and external Kelipot shells, 613 channels ("limbs" of
the King) and the Divine souls in man. Kabbalists see all aspects as unified
through their absolute dependence on their source in the Ein Sof. Sefirot and
the Divine Feminine. The "Sephirot" (also spelled "sephiroth") (singular
"sefirah") are the ten emanations and attributes of God with which he
continually sustains the universe in existence. The Zohar and other formative
texts elaborate on their emergence from concealment and potential in the
infinite unity of the Ein Sof. Cordovero systemises them as one light poured
into ten created vessels. Comparison of his counting with Luria's, describes
dual rational and unconscious aspects of kabbalah. Two metaphors are used to
describe the "sephirot", their theocentric manifestation as the Trees of Life
and Knowledge, and their anthropocentric correspondence in man, exemplified as
Adam Kadmon. This dual-directional perpective embodies the cyclical, inclusive
nature of the divine flow, where alternative divine and human perspectives have
validity. The central metaphor of man allows human understanding of the
sephirot, as they correspond to the psychological faculties of the soul, and
incorporate masculine and feminine aspects after Genesis 1:27 ("God created man
in His own image, in the image of God He created him, male and female He
created them"). Corresponding to the last "sefirah" in Creation is the
indwelling "shekhinah" (Feminine Divine Presence). Downward flow of divine
Light in Creation forms the supernal Four Worlds; Atziluth, Beri'ah, Yetzirah
and Assiah manifesting the dominance of successive sephirot towards action in
this world. The acts of man unite or divide the Heavenly masculine and feminine
aspects of the sephirot, their anthropomorphic harmony completing Creation. As
the spiritual foundation of Creation, the sephirot correspond to the names of
God in Judaism and the particular nature of any entity. Ten Sefirot as process
of Creation. According to Lurianic cosmology, the "sefirot" correspond to
various levels of creation (ten "sefirot" in each of the Four Worlds, and four
worlds within each of the larger four worlds, each containing ten "sefirot",
which themselves contain ten "sefirot", to an infinite number of
possibilities), and are emanated from the Creator for the purpose of creating
the universe. The "sefirot" are considered revelations of the Creator's will
("ratzon"), and they should not be understood as ten different "gods" but as
ten different ways the one God reveals his will through the Emanations. It is
not God who changes but the ability to perceive God that changes. Ten Sefirot
as process of ethics. Divine creation by means of the Ten Sefirot is an ethical
process. They represent the different aspects of Morality. Loving-Kindness is a
possible moral justification found in Chessed, and Gevurah is the Moral
Justification of Justice and both are mediated by Mercy which is Rachamim.
However, these pillars of morality become immoral once they become extremes.
When Loving-Kindness become extreme it can lead to sexual depravity and lack of
Justice to the wicked. When Justice becomes extreme, it can lead to torture and
the Murder of innocents and unfair punishment. "Righteous" humans ("tzadikim")
ascend these ethical qualities of the ten "sefirot" by doing righteous actions.
If there were no righteous humans, the blessings of God would become completely
hidden, and creation would cease to exist. While real human actions are the
"Foundation" ("Yesod") of this universe ("Malchut"), these actions must
accompany the conscious intention of compassion. Compassionate actions are
often impossible without faith ("Emunah"), meaning to trust that God always
supports compassionate actions even when God seems hidden. Ultimately, it is
necessary to show compassion toward oneself too in order to share compassion
toward others. This "selfish" enjoyment of God's blessings but only in order to
empower oneself to assist others is an important aspect of "Restriction", and
is considered a kind of golden mean in kabbalah, corresponding to the "sefirah"
of Adornment (Tiferet) being part of the "Middle Column". Moses ben Jacob
Cordovero, wrote "Tomer Devorah" ("Palm Tree of Deborah"), he presents an
ethical teaching of Judaism in the kabbalistic context of the ten "sefirot".
"Tomer Devorah" has become also a foundational Musar text. Descending spiritual
Worlds. Medieval Kabbalists believed that all things are linked to God through
these emanations, making all levels in creation part of one great, gradually
descending chain of being. Through this any lower creation reflects its
particular characteristics in Supernal Divinity. Hasidic thought extends the
Divine immanence of Kabbalah by holding that God is all that really exists, all
else being completely undifferentiated from God's perspective. This view can be
defined as monistic panentheism. According to this philosophy, God's existence
is higher than anything that this world can express, yet he includes all things
of this world within his Divine reality in perfect unity, so that the Creation
effected no change in him at all. This paradox is dealt with at length in
Chabad texts. Origin of evil. Among problems considered in the Hebrew Kabbalah
is the universal religious issue of the nature and origin of evil. In the views
of some Kabbalists this conceives 'evil' as a 'quality of God', asserting that
negativity enters into the essence of the Absolute. In this view it is
conceived that the Absolute needs evil to 'be what it is', i.e., to exist. Role
of Man. Kabbalistic doctrine gives man the central role in Creation, as his
soul and body correspond to the supernal divine manifestations. In the
Christian Kabbalah this scheme was universalised to describe "harmino mundi",
the harmony of Creation within man. In Judaism, it gave a profound
spiritualisation of Jewish practice. While the kabbalistic scheme gave a
radically innovative, though conceptually continuous, development of mainstream
Midrashic and Talmudic Rabbinic notions, kabbalistic thought underscored and
invigorated conservative Jewish observance. The esoteric teachings of kabbalah
gave the traditional mitzvot observances the central role in spiritual
creation, whether the practitioner was learned in this knowledge or not.
Accompanying normative Jewish observance and worship with elite mystical
kavanot intentions gave them theurgic power, but sincere observance by common
folk, especially in the Hasidic popularisation of kabbalah, could replace
esoteric abilities. Many kabbalists were also leading legal figures in Judaism,
such as Nachmanides and Joseph Karo. Medieval kabbalah elaborates particular
reasons for each Biblical mitzvah, and their role in harmonising the supernal
divine flow, uniting masculine and feminine forces on High. With this, the
feminine Divine presence in this world is drawn from exile to the Holy One
Above. The 613 mitzvot are embodied in the organs and soul of man. Lurianic
kabbalah incorporates this in the more inclusive scheme of Jewish messianic
rectification of exiled divinity. Jewish mysticism, in contrast to Divine-
transcendent rationalist human-centred reasons for Jewish observance, gave
Divine-immanent providential cosmic significance to the daily events in the
worldly life of man in general, and the spiritual role of Jewish observance in
particular. Human soul. The Raaya Meheimna, a section of related teachings
spread throughout the Zohar, discusses fourth and fifth parts of the human
soul, the "chayyah" and "yehidah" (first mentioned in the Midrash Rabbah).
Gershom Scholem writes that these "were considered to represent the sublimest
levels of intuitive cognition, and to be within the grasp of only a few chosen
individuals". The Chayyah and the Yechidah do not enter into the body like the
other three‚Äîthus they received less attention in other sections of the
"Zohar". Tzimtzum, Shevirah and Tikun. After publication of the Zohar in the
late 13th century, attempts were made to interpret and systemise the doctrines
within its imagery. This culminated in the successive, comprehensive
expositions of Cordovero and Luria in 16th century Safed. While Cordovero
systemised Medieval kabbalah in a rationally influenced linear scheme, this was
subsequently superseded by the mythological, dynamic scheme of Isaac Luria,
recorded by Chaim Vital and his other disciples. Lurianic theosophy became the
foundation of modern kabbalah, incorporating Medieval theosophy within its
wider explanation. The supra-rational Lurianic doctrines of Tzimtzum, Shevirah
and Tikun reorganised Kabbalistic doctrine around crisis-catharsis Divine exile
and redemption, explaining Jewish messianism in Kabbalah. "Tzimtzum"
(Constriction/Concentration) is the primordial cosmic act whereby God
"contracted" His infinite light, leaving a "void" into which the light of
existence was poured. This allowed the emergence of independent existence that
would not become nullified by the pristine Infinite Light, reconciling the
unity of the Ein Sof with the plurality of creation. This changed the first
creative act into one of withdrawal/exile, the antithesis of the ultimate
Divine Will. In contrast, a new emanation after the Tzimtzum shone into the
vacuum to begin creation, but led to an initial instability called "Tohu"
(Chaos), leading to a new crisis of "Shevirah" (Shattering) of the sephirot
vessels. The shards of the broken vessels fell down into the lower realms,
animated by remnants of their divine light, causing primordial exile within the
Divine Persona before the creation of man. Exile and enclothement of higher
divinity within lower realms throughout existence requires man to complete the
"Tikkun olam" (Rectification) process. Rectification Above corresponds to the
reorganization of the independent sefirot into relating "Partzufim" (Divine
Personas), previously referred to obliquely in the Zohar. From the catastrophe
stems the possibility of self-aware Creation, and also the "Kelipot" (Impure
Shells) of previous Medieval kabbalah. The metaphorical anthropomorphism of the
partzufim accenuates the sexual unifications of the redemption process, while
Gilgul reincarnation emerges from the scheme. Uniquely, Lurianism gave formerly
private mysticism the urgency of Messianic social involvement. According to
interpretations of Luria, the catastrophe stemmed from the "unwillingness" of
the residue imprint after the Tzimtzum to relate to the new vitality that began
creation. The process was arranged to shed and harmonise the Divine Infinity
with the latent potential of evil. The creation of Adam would have redeemed
existence, but his sin caused new shevirah of Divine vitality, requiring the
Giving of the Torah to begin Messianic rectification. Historical and individual
history becomes the narrative of reclaiming exiled Divine sparks. Linguistic
mysticism of Hebrew. Kabbalistic thought extended Biblical and Midrashic
notions that God enacted Creation through the Hebrew language and through the
Torah into a full linguistic mysticism. In this, every Hebrew letter, word,
number, even accent on words of the Hebrew Bible contain esoteric meanings,
describing the spiritual dimensions within exoteric ideas, and it teaches the
hermeneutic methods of interpretation for ascertaining these meanings. Names of
God in Judaism have further prominence, though fluidity of meaning turns the
whole Torah into a Divine name. As the Hebrew name of things is the channel of
their lifeforce, parallel to the sephirot, so concepts such as "holiness" and
"mitzvot" embody ontological Divine immanence, as God can be known in
manifestation as well as transcendence. The infinite potential of meaning in
the Torah, as in the Ein Sof, is reflected in the symbol of the two trees of
the Garden of Eden; the Torah of the Tree of Knowledge is the external,
Halachic Torah, through which mystics can perceive the unlimited Torah of the
Tree of Life. In Lurianic expression, each of the 600,000 souls of Israel find
their own interpretation in Torah. As early as the 1st century BCE Jews
believed that the Torah (first five books of the Hebrew Bible) and wider
canonical texts contained encoded messages and hidden meanings. Gematria is one
method for discovering its hidden meanings. Each letter in Hebrew also
represents a number; Hebrew, unlike many other languages, never developed a
separate numerical alphabet. By converting letters to numbers, Kabbalists were
able to find a hidden meaning in each word. This method of interpretation was
used extensively by various schools. Primary texts. Like the rest of the
Rabbinic literature, the texts of kabbalah were once part of an ongoing oral
tradition, though, over the centuries, much of the oral tradition has been
written down. Jewish forms of esotericism existed over 2,000 years ago. Ben
Sira (born c. 170 BCE) warns against it, saying: "You shall have no business
with secret things". Nonetheless, mystical studies were undertaken and resulted
in mystical literature, the first being the Apocalyptic literature of the
second and first pre-Christian centuries and which contained elements that
carried over to later kabbalah. Throughout the centuries since, many texts have
been produced, among them the ancient descriptions of "Sefer Yetzirah", the
"Heichalot" mystical ascent literature, the "Bahir", "Sefer Raziel HaMalakh"
and the "Zohar", the main text of Kabbalistic exegesis. Classic mystical Bible
commentaries are included in fuller versions of the "Mikraot Gedolot" (Main
Commentators). Cordoveran systemisation is presented in "Pardes Rimonim",
philosophical articulation in the works of the Maharal, and Lurianic
rectification in "Etz Chayim". Subsequent interpretation of Lurianic Kabbalah
was made in the writings of Shalom Sharabi, in "Nefesh HaChaim" and the 20th-
century "Sulam". Hasidism interpreted kabbalistic structures to their
correspondence in inward perception. The Hasidic development of kabbalah
incorporates a successive stage of Jewish mysticism from historical kabbalistic
metaphysics. Scholarship. The first modern-academic historians of Judaism, the
"Wissenschaft des Judentums" school of the 19th century, framed Judaism in
solely rational terms in the emancipatory Haskalah spirit of their age. They
opposed kabbalah and restricted its significance from Jewish historiography. In
the mid-20th century, it was left to Gershom Scholem to overturn their stance,
establishing the flourishing present-day academic investigation of Jewish
mysticism, and making Heichalot, Kabbalistic and Hasidic texts the objects of
scholarly critical-historical study. In Scholem's opinion, the mythical and
mystical components of Judaism were at least as important as the rational ones,
and he thought that they, rather than the exoteric Halakha, were the living
current in historical Jewish development. The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
has been a centre of this research, including Scholem and Isaiah Tishby, and
more recently Joseph Dan, Yehuda Liebes, Rachel Elior, and Moshe Idel. Scholars
across the eras of Jewish mysticism in America and Britain have included Arthur
Green, Lawrence Fine, Elliot Wolfson, Daniel Matt and Ada Rapoport-Albert.
Scholars in the present generation have revised early theories including
Scholem's, on such questions as Heichalot mysticism and a Jewish "gnosticism",
the origins of Kabbalah, and the sources of Hasidism. Moshe Idel has opened up
research on the Ecstatic Kabbalah alongside the theosophical, and has called
for new multi-disciplinary approaches, beyond the philological and historical
that have dominated until now, to include phenomenology, psychology,
anthropology and comparative studies. Claims for authority. Historians have
noted that most claims for the authority of kabbalah involve an argument of the
antiquity of authority (see, e.g., Joseph Dan's discussion in his "Circle of
the Unique Cherub"). As a result, virtually all early foundational works
pseudepigraphically claim, or are ascribed, ancient authorship. For example,
"Sefer Raziel HaMalach", an astro-magical text partly based on a magical manual
of late antiquity, "Sefer ha-Razim", was, according to the kabbalists,
transmitted by the angel Raziel to Adam after he was evicted from Eden. Another
famous work, the early "Sefer Yetzirah", supposedly dates back to the patriarch
Abraham. This tendency toward pseudepigraphy has its roots in apocalyptic
literature, which claims that esoteric knowledge such as magic, divination and
astrology was transmitted to humans in the mythic past by the two angels, Aza
and Azaz'el (in other places, Azaz'el and Uzaz'el) who fell from heaven (see
Genesis 6:4). Criticism. Dualistic cosmology. Although Kabbalah propounds the
Unity of God, one of the most serious and sustained criticisms is that it may
lead away from monotheism, and instead promote dualism, the belief that there
is a supernatural counterpart to God. The dualistic system holds that there is
a good power versus an evil power. There are two primary models of Gnostic-
dualistic cosmology: the first, which goes back to Zoroastrianism, believes
creation is ontologically divided between good and evil forces; the second,
found largely in Greco-Roman metaphysics like Neo-Platonism, argues that the
universe knew a primordial harmony, but that a cosmic disruption yielded a
second, evil, dimension to reality. This second model influenced the cosmology
of the Kabbalah. According to Kabbalistic cosmology, the Ten Sefirot correspond
to ten levels of creation. These levels of creation must not be understood as
ten different "gods" but as ten different ways of revealing God, one per level.
It is not God who changes but the ability to perceive God that changes. While
God may seem to exhibit dual natures (masculine-feminine, compassionate-
judgmental, creator-creation), all adherents of Kabbalah have consistently
stressed the ultimate unity of God. For example, in all discussions of Male and
Female, the hidden nature of God exists above it all without limit, being
called the Infinite or the "No End" (Ein Sof)‚Äîneither one nor the other,
transcending any definition. The ability of God to become hidden from
perception is called "Restriction" (Tzimtzum). Hiddenness makes creation
possible because God can become "revealed" in a diversity of limited ways,
which then form the building blocks of creation. Kabbalistic texts, including
the "Zohar", appear to affirm dualism, as they ascribe all evil to the
separation from holiness known as the Sitra Achra ("the other side") which is
opposed to "Sitra D‚ÄôKedushah", or the Side of Holiness. The "left side" of
divine emanation is a negative mirror image of the "side of holiness" with
which it was locked in combat. ["Encyclopaedia Judaica", Volume 6, "Dualism",
p.¬ 244]. While this evil aspect exists within the divine structure of the
Sefirot, the "Zohar" indicates that the Sitra Ahra has no power over Ein Sof,
and only exists as a necessary aspect of the creation of God to give man free
choice, and that evil is the consequence of this choice. It is not a
supernatural force opposed to God, but a reflection of the inner moral combat
within mankind between the dictates of morality and the surrender to one's
basic instincts. Rabbi Dr. David Gottlieb notes that many Kabbalists hold that
the concepts of, e.g., a Heavenly Court or the Sitra Ahra are only given to
humanity by God as a working model to understand His ways within our own
epistemological limits. They reject the notion that a satan or angels actually
exist. Others hold that non-divine spiritual entities were indeed created by
God as a means for exacting his will. Distinction between Jews and non-Jews. A
number of medieval Kabbalistic sources contain statements to the effect that
the Jewish soul is ontologically different from the soul of non-Jews; for
example, it is held by some that Jews have three levels of soul, "nefesh",
"ruach" and "neshamah" while non-Jews have only "nefesh". The Zohar comments on
the Biblical verse which states "Let the waters teem with swarms of creatures
that have a living soul" as follows: "The verse 'creatures that have a living
soul,' pertains to the Jews, for they are the children of God, and from God
come their holy souls...And the souls of the other nations, from where do they
come? Rabbi Elazar says that they have souls from the impure left side, and
therefore they are all impure, defiling anyone who comes near them" (Zohar
commentary on Genesis). Such theologically framed hostility may have been a
response to some medieval demonization of Jews which developed in some parts of
Western and Christian society and thought, starting with the Patristic
writings. According to Isaac Luria (1534‚Äì72) and other commentators on the
Zohar, righteous Gentiles do not have this demonic aspect and are in many ways
similar to Jewish souls. A number of prominent Kabbalists, e.g. Rabbi Pinchas
Eliyahu of Vilna, the author of "Sefer ha-Brit", held that only some marginal
elements in the humanity represent these demonic forces. On the other hand, the
souls of Jewish heretics have much more satanic energy than the worst of idol
worshippers; this view is popular in some Hasidic circles, especially Satmar
Hasidim. Some later Kabbalistic works build and elaborate on these ideas. One
point of view is represented by the Hasidic work Tanya (1797), in order to
argue that Jews have a different character of soul: while a non-Jew, according
to the author Rabbi Shneur Zalman of Liadi (b. 1745), can achieve a high level
of spiritually, similar to an angel, his soul is still fundamentally different
in character, but not value, from a Jewish one. A similar view is found in
early medieval philosophical book Kuzari, by Yehuda Halevi (1075-1141 AD). On
the other hand, many prominent Kabbalists rejected this idea and believed in
essential equality of all human souls. Menahem Azariah da Fano (1548‚Äì1620),
in his book "Reincarnations of souls", provides many examples of non-Jewish
Biblical figures being reincarnated into Jews and vice versa; the contemporary
Habad Rabbi and mystic Dov Ber Pinson teaches that distinctions between Jews
and non-Jews in works such as the Tanya are not to be understood as literally
referring to the external properties of a person (what religious community they
are born into), but rather as referring to the properties of souls as they can
be re-incarnated in any religious community. Another prominent Habad Rabbi,
Abraham Yehudah Khein (b. 1878), believed that spiritually elevated Gentiles
have essentially Jewish souls, "who just lack the formal conversion to
Judaism", and that unspiritual Jews are "Jewish merely by their birth
documents". The great 20th-century Kabbalist Yehuda Ashlag viewed the terms
"Jews" and "Gentile" as different levels of perception, available to every
human soul. David Halperin argues that the collapse of Kabbalah's influence
among Western European Jews over the course of the 17th and 18th century was a
result of the cognitive dissonance they experienced between the negative
perception of Gentiles found in some exponents of Kabbalah, and their own
positive dealings with non-Jews, which were rapidly expanding and improving
during this period due to the influence of the Enlightenment. However, a number
of renowned Kabbalists claimed the exact opposite. In their view, Kabbalah
transcends the borders of Judaism and can serve as a basis of inter-religious
theosophy and a universal religion. Rabbi Pinchas Elijah Hurwitz, a prominent
Lithuanian-Galician Kabbalist of the 18th century and a moderate proponent of
the Haskalah, called for brotherly love and solidarity between all nations, and
believed that Kabbalah can empower everyone, Jews and Gentiles alike, with
prophetic abilities. The works of Abraham Cohen de Herrera (1570‚Äì1635) are
full of references to Gentile mystical philosophers. Such approach was
particularly common among the Renaissance and post-Renaissance Italian Jews.
Late medieval and Renaissance Italian Kabbalists, such as Yohanan Alemanno,
David Messer Leon and Abraham Yagel, adhered to humanistic ideals and
incorporated teachings of various Christian and pagan mystics. A prime
representative of this humanist stream in Kabbalah was Rabbi Elijah Benamozegh,
who explicitly praised Christianity, Islam, Zoroastrianism, Hinduism, as well
as a whole range of ancient pagan mystical systems. He believed that Kabbalah
can reconcile the differences between the world religions, which represent
different facets and stages of the universal human spirituality. In his
writings, Benamozegh interprets the New Testament, Hadith, Vedas, Avesta and
pagan mysteries according to the Kabbalistic theosophy. For a different
perspective, see Wolfson. He provides numerous examples from the 17th to the
20th centuries, which would challenge the view of Halperin cited above as well
as the notion that "modern Judaism" has rejected or dismissed this "outdated
aspect" of the religion and, he argues, there are still Kabbalists today who
harbor this view. He argues that, while it is accurate to say that many Jews do
and would find this distinction offensive, it is inaccurate to say that the
idea has been totally rejected in all circles. As Wolfson has argued, it is an
ethical demand on the part of scholars to continue to be vigilant with regard
to this matter and in this way the tradition can be refined from within.
However, as explained above, many well known Kabbalists rejected the literal
interpretation of these seemingly discriminatory views. They argued that the
term "Jew" was to be interpreted metaphorically, as referring to the spiritual
development of the soul, rather than the superficial denomination of the
individual, and they added a chain of intermediary states between "Jews" and
idol worshippers, or spiritualized the very definition of "Jews" and "non-Jews"
and argued that a soul can be re-incarnated in different communities (whether
Jewish or not) as much as within a single one. Medieval views. The idea that
there are ten divine "sefirot" could evolve over time into the idea that "God
is One being, yet in that One being there are Ten" which opens up a debate
about what the "correct beliefs" in God should be, according to Judaism. Rabbi
Saadia Gaon teaches in his book Emunot v'Deot that Jews who believe in
reincarnation have adopted a non-Jewish belief. Maimonides (12th century)
rejected many of the texts of the Hekalot, particularly "Shi'ur Qomah" whose
starkly anthropomorphic vision of God he considered heretical. Nachmanides
(13th century) provides background to many Kabbalistic ideas. His works, Torah,
offer in-depth of various concepts. In fact, an entire book, entitled Gevuras
Aryeh, was authored by Rabbi Yaakov Yehuda Aryeh Leib Frenkel and originally
published in 1915, specifically to explain and elaborate on the Kabbalistic
concepts addressed by Nachmanides in his commentary to the Five books of Moses
Rabbi Abraham ben Moses ben Maimon, in the spirit of his father Maimonides,
Rabbi Saadiah Gaon, and other predecessors, explains at length in his book
"Milhhamot HaShem" that the Almighty is in no way literally within time or
space nor physically outside time or space, since time and space simply do not
apply to His Being whatsoever. This is in contrast to certain popular
understandings of modern Kabbalah which teach a form of panentheism, that His
'essence' is within everything. Around the 1230s, Rabbi Meir ben Simon of
Narbonne wrote an epistle (included in his "Milhhemet Mitzvah") against his
contemporaries, the early Kabbalists, characterizing them as blasphemers who
even approach heresy. He particularly singled out the Sefer Bahir, rejecting
the attribution of its authorship to the "tanna" R. Nehhunya ben ha-Kanah and
describing some of its content as truly heretical. Rabbi Yitzchak ben Sheshet
Perfet (The "Rivash"), 1326‚Äì1408. Although as is evident from his response on
the topic (157) the Rivash was skeptical of certain interpretations of Kabbalah
popular in his time, it is equally evident that overall he did accept Kabbalah
as received Jewish wisdom, and attempted to defend it from attackers. To this
end he cited and rejected a certain philosopher who claimed that Kabbalah was
"worse than Christianity", as it made God into 10, not just into three. Most
followers of Kabbalah have never followed this interpretation of Kabbalah, on
the grounds that the concept of the Christian Trinity posits that there are
three persons existing within the Godhead, one of whom became a human being. In
contrast, the mainstream understanding of the Kabbalistic "Sefirot" holds that
they have no mind or intelligence; further, they are not addressed in prayer
and they cannot become a human being. They are conduits for interaction, not
persons or beings. Nonetheless, many important poskim, such as Maimonidies in
his work Mishneh Torah, prohibit any use of mediators between oneself and the
Creator as a form of idolatry. Rabbi Leone di Modena, a 17th-century Venetian
critic of Kabbalah, wrote that if we were to accept the Kabbalah, then the
Christian trinity would indeed be compatible with Judaism, as the Trinity
closely resembles the Kabbalistic doctrine of the "Sefirot". This critique was
in response to the knowledge that some European Jews of the period addressed
individual "Sefirot" in some of their prayers, although the practise was
apparently uncommon. Apologists explain that Jews may have been praying "for"
and not necessarily "to" the aspects of Godliness represented by the "Sefirot".
Yaakov Emden, 1697‚Äì1776, wrote the book "Mitpahhath Sfarim" ("Veil of the
Books"), a detailed critique of the Zohar in which he concludes that certain
parts of the Zohar contain heretical teaching and therefore could not have been
written by Shimon bar Yochai. Orthodox Judaism. Yihhyah Qafahh, an early-20th-
century Yemenite Jewish leader and grandfather of Yosef Qafih, also wrote a
book entitled "Milhamoth ha-Shem" ("Wars of the Name") against what he
perceived as the false teachings of the Zohar and the false Kabbalah of Isaac
Luria. He is credited with spearheading the Dor Daim who continue in Yihhyah
Qafahh's view of Kabbalah into modern times. Yeshayahu Leibowitz 1903‚Äì1994,
brother of Nechama Leibowitz, though Modern Orthodox in his world view,
publicly shared the views expressed in R. Yihhyah Qafahh's book "Milhhamoth
HaShem" and elaborated upon these views in his many writings. There is dispute
among modern Haredim as to the status of Isaac Luria's, the Arizal's
Kabbalistic teachings. While a portion of Modern Orthodox Rabbis, Dor Daim and
many students of the Rambam, completely reject Arizal's Kabbalistic teachings,
as well as deny that the "Zohar" is authoritative, or from Shimon bar Yohai,
all three of these groups completely accept the existence and validity of
"Ma'aseh Merkavah" and "Ma'aseh B'resheet" mysticism. Their only disagreement
concerns whether the Kabbalistic teachings promulgated today are accurate
representations of those esoteric teachings to which the Talmud refers. Within
the Haredi Jewish community one can find both rabbis who sympathize with such a
view, while not necessarily agreeing with it, as well as rabbis who consider
such a view absolute heresy. Conservative, Reform and Reconstructionist
Judaism. Kabbalah tended to be rejected by most Jews in the Conservative and
Reform movements, though its influences were not completely eliminated. While
it was generally not studied as a discipline, the Kabbalistic "Kabbalat
Shabbat" service remained part of liberal liturgy, as did the "Yedid Nefesh"
prayer. Nevertheless, in the 1960s, Rabbi Saul Lieberman of the Jewish
Theological Seminary of America is reputed to have introduced a lecture by
Scholem on Kabbalah with a statement that Kabbalah itself was "nonsense", but
the academic study of Kabbalah was "scholarship". This view became popular
among many Jews, who viewed the subject as worthy of study, but who did not
accept Kabbalah as teaching literal truths. According to Rabbi Bradley Shavit
Artson (Dean of the Conservative Ziegler School of Rabbinic Studies in the
American Jewish University) However, in the late 20th century and early 21st
century there has been a revival in interest in Kabbalah in all branches of
liberal Judaism. The Kabbalistic 12th-century prayer "Anim Zemirot" was
restored to the new Conservative "Sim Shalom" "siddur", as was the "B'rikh
Shmeh" passage from the Zohar, and the mystical "Ushpizin" service welcoming to
the "Sukkah" the spirits of Jewish forbearers. "Anim Zemirot" and the 16th-
century mystical poem "Lekhah Dodi" reappeared in the Reform Siddur "Gates of
Prayer" in 1975. All Rabbinical seminaries now teach several courses in
Kabbalah‚Äîin Conservative Judaism, both the Jewish Theological Seminary and
the Ziegler School of Rabbinical Studies of the University of Judaism in Los
Angeles have full-time instructors in Kabbalah and "Hasidut", Eitan Fishbane
and Pinchas Geller, respectively. In the Reform movement Sharon Koren teaches
at the Hebrew Union College. Reform Rabbis like Herbert Weiner and Lawrence
Kushner have renewed interest in Kabbalah among Reform Jews. At the
Reconstructionist Rabbinical College, the only accredited seminary that has
curricular requirements in Kabbalah, Joel Hecker is the full-time instructor
teaching courses in Kabbalah and Hasidut. According to Artson: The
Reconstructionist movement, under the leadership of Arthur Green in the 1980s
and 1990s, and with the influence of Zalman Schachter Shalomi, brought a strong
openness to Kabbalah and hasidic elements that then came to play prominent
roles in the Kol ha-Neshamah siddur series. Contemporary study. Neo-Hasidic.
From the early 20th century, Neo-Hasidism expressed a non-Orthodox Jewish
interest in Jewish mysticism, becoming organisational among Conservative,
Reform and Reconstructionalist Jewish denominations from the 1960s, through
Jewish Renewal and the Chavurah movement. The writings and teachings of Zalman
Schachter-Shalomi, Arthur Green, Lawrence Kushner, Herbert Weiner and others,
has sought a Kabbalistic and Hasidic study and spirituality among modernist
Jews.
