Latter Day Saint movement The Latter Day Saint movement (also called the LDS
movement or LDS restorationist movement) is the collection of independent
church groups that trace their origins to a Christian primitivist movement
founded by Joseph Smith in the late 1820s. Collectively, these churches have
over 14 million members. The vast majority of Mormons belong to The Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church), with their predominant theology
being Mormonism. The LDS Church self-identifies as Christian. A minority of
Latter Day Saint adherents, such as members of the Community of Christ, believe
in traditional Protestant theology, and have distanced themselves from some of
the distinctive doctrines of Mormonism. Other breakaway groups include the
Remnant Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints which support lineal
succession of leadership of Joseph Smith's descendants; and the more
controversial Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints, who
defend the practice of polygamy. The movement began in western New York during
the Second Great Awakening when Smith said that he received visions revealing a
new sacred text, the Book of Mormon, which he published in 1830 as a supplement
to the Bible. Based on the teachings of this book and other revelations, Smith
founded a Christian primitivist church, called the "Church of Christ". The Book
of Mormon brought hundreds of early followers, who later became known as
"Mormons", "Latter Day Saints", or just "Saints." In 1831 Smith moved the
church headquarters to Kirtland, Ohio, and in 1834 changed its name to the
"Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints." After the church in Ohio
collapsed by dissensions in 1838, Smith and the body of the church moved to
Missouri, and later to Illinois. After he was murdered in 1844, a succession
crisis led to the organization splitting into several groups. The largest of
these, the LDS Church, migrated under the leadership of Brigham Young to the
Great Basin (now Utah) and became most prominently known for its 19th-century
practice of polygamy. The LDS Church officially renounced this practice in
1890, and gradually discontinued it, resulting in the Utah Territory becoming a
U.S. state. This change resulted in the formation of a number of small sects
who sought to maintain polygamy and other 19th-century Mormon doctrines and
practices, now referred to as "Mormon fundamentalism". Other groups originating
within the Latter Day Saint movement followed different paths in Missouri,
Illinois, Michigan, and Pennsylvania. For the most part these groups rejected
plural marriage and some of Smith's later teachings. The largest of these, the
Community of Christ (originally known as the "Reorganized Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter Day Saints"), was formed in Illinois in 1860 by several groups
uniting around Smith's son, Joseph Smith III. Most existing denominations that
adhere to the teachings of Smith have some historical relationship with the
movement. History. The driving force behind and founder of the Latter Day Saint
movement was Joseph Smith, Jr., and to a lesser extent, during the movement's
first two years, Oliver Cowdery. Throughout his life, Smith told of an
experience he had as a boy having seen God the Father and Jesus Christ as two
separate beings, who told him that the true church had been lost and would be
restored through him, and that he would be given the authority to organize and
lead the true Church of Christ. Smith and Cowdery also explained that the
angels John the Baptist, Peter, James and John visited them in 1829 and gave
them authority to reestablish the Church of Christ. The first Latter Day Saint
church was formed in April 1830, consisting of a community of believers in the
western New York towns of Fayette, Manchester, and Colesville. They called
themselves the "Church of Christ", and on April 6, 1830, the church formally
organized into a legal institution under that name. By 1834, the church was
being referred to as the "Church of the Latter Day Saints" in early church
publications, and in 1838 Joseph Smith announced that he had received a
revelation from God that officially changed the name to the "Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter Day Saints". In 1844, William Law and several other Latter Day
Saints in church leadership positions publicly denounced Smith's secret
practice of polygamy in the controversial "Nauvoo Expositor", and formed their
own church. The city council of Nauvoo, Illinois subsequently had the printing
press of the "Expositor" destroyed. In spite of Smith's later offer to pay
damages for destroyed property, critics of Smith and the church considered the
destruction heavy-handed. Some called for the Latter Day Saints to be either
expelled or destroyed. Following Smith's assassination by a mob in Carthage,
Illinois, several prominent members of the church claimed to be Smith's
legitimate successor. These various claims resulted in a succession crisis, in
which the majority of church members followed Brigham Young, he being the
senior Apostle of the church; others followed Sidney Rigdon or James Strang.
The crisis resulted in several permanent schisms as well as the formation of
splinter groups, some of which no longer exist. These various groups are
sometimes referred to under two geographical headings: "Prairie Saints" (those
that remained in the Midwest United States) and "Rocky Mountain Saints" (those
who followed Brigham Young to what would later become the state of Utah).
Today, there are many small schism organizations who regard themselves as a
part of the Latter Day Saint movement, though in most cases they do not
acknowledge the other branches as valid and regard their own tradition as the
only correct and authorized version of the church Smith originally founded. The
vast majority (over 98 percent) of Latter Day Saints belong to the largest
denomination, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church)
which reports 14 million members worldwide. The second-largest denomination is
the Community of Christ, which reports over 250,000 members. There are also
tens of thousands of adherents within small sects of Mormon fundamentalism.
These sects separated from the LDS Church because they continue to practice
plural marriage, which the LDS Church officially abandoned in 1890. Beliefs.
"Saint"-designation of members. Latter Day Saints adopt a definition of "saint"
that all members of the church are considered "Saints". The term "latter day"
distinguishes between "biblical saints" and "modern saints" who "live in the
latter days". Restoration. The Latter Day Saint movement classifies itself
within Christianity, but as a distinct restored dispensation. Latter Day Saints
hold that a Great Apostasy began in Christianity not long after the ascension
of Jesus Christ, marked with the corruption of Christian doctrine by Greek and
other philosophies, and followers dividing into different ideological groups.
Additionally, Latter Day Saints claim the martyrdom of the Apostles led to a
loss of Priesthood authority to administer the church and its ordinances.
According to Latter Day Saint churches, the Lord re-established the early
Christian church as found in the New Testament through Joseph Smith. In
particular, Latter Day Saints believe that angels such as Peter, James, John,
and John the Baptist appeared to Joseph Smith and others and bestowed various
Priesthood authorities on them. Thus, Smith and his successors are considered
modern prophets who receive revelation from God to guide the church. Theology.
Most members of Latter Day Saint churches are adherents to Mormonism, a
theology based on Joseph Smith's later teachings and further developed by
Brigham Young, James Strang and others who claimed to be Smith's successors.
The term "Mormon" derives from the Book of Mormon, and most of these adherents
refer to themselves as Latter Day Saints or Mormons. Mormonism and Christianity
have a complex theological, historical, and sociological relationship. Mormons
express the doctrines of Mormonism using standard biblical terminology, and
claim to have similar views about the nature of Jesus' atonement, bodily
resurrection, and Second Coming as traditional Christianity. Nevertheless,
Mormons agree with non-Mormons that their view of God is significantly
different from the trinitarian view of the Nicene Creed of the 4th century.
Mormons consider the Bible as scripture (insofar as it is "translated
correctly"), and have also adopted additional scriptures. Mormons not only
practice baptism and celebrate the eucharist but also participate in religious
rituals not practiced in traditional Christianity. Although the various
branches of Christianity have diverse views about the nature of salvation, the
Mormon view is particularly distinct. Focusing on differences, some Christians
consider Mormonism "non-Christian;" and Mormons, focusing on similarities, are
offended at being so characterized. Mormons do not accept non-Mormon baptism
nor do non-Mormon Christians usually accept Mormon baptism. Mormons regularly
proselytize individuals actually or nominally within the Christian tradition,
and some Christians, especially evangelicals, proselytize Mormons. A prominent
scholarly view is that Mormonism is a form of Christianity, but is distinct
enough from traditional Christianity so as to form a new religious tradition,
much as Christianity is more than just a sect of Judaism. The Mormonism that
originated with Joseph Smith, Jr. in the 1820s shared strong similarities with
some elements of 19th-century Protestant Christianity. However, beginning with
his First Vision, (and then during the 1830s and 40s), Smith departed
significantly from traditional Christianity, claiming all churches of his day
were part of a Great Apostasy that had distorted or abandoned Biblical
doctrinal truths. Mormons believe that God, through Smith and his successors,
restored these truths and doctrinal clarifications, and by new heavenly
dispensation, restored the original Church and Christianity taught by Jesus.
For example, Smith rejected the Nicene doctrine of the Trinity as of one body
and substance, with no "body, parts, or passions," and instead taught that the
Godhead included humankind's Eternal Father, His Begotten Son, Jesus Christ
(the Redeemer), and the Holy Ghost; further that all humans are co-eternal with
God and have the potential to become Gods themselves, being the offspring of
Eternal Parentage. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS
Church), the largest Mormon denomination, while acknowledging its differences
with mainstream Christianity, often focuses on its commonalities, which are
many. A small fraction of Latter Day Saints, most notably those within the
Community of Christ, the second largest Latter Day Saint denomination, follow a
traditional Protestant theology. The Community of Christ view God in
trinitarian terms, and reject the distinctive theological developments they
believe came later in Mormonism. Notes. See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Wikipedia:Footnotes for an explanation of how to generate footnotes using the
tags, and the template below
