Lutheranism Lutheranism is a major branch of Western Christianity that
identifies with the theology of Martin Luther, a German reformer. Luther's
efforts to reform the theology and practice of the Roman Catholic Church
launched the Protestant Reformation. Beginning with the 95 Theses, Luther's
writings were disseminated internationally, spreading the ideas of the
Reformation beyond the ability of governmental and churchly authorities to
control it. The split between the Lutherans and the Roman Catholics began with
the Edict of Worms in 1521, which officially excommunicated Luther and all of
his followers. The divide centered over the doctrine of Justification.
Lutheranism advocates a doctrine of justification "by grace alone through faith
alone because of Christ alone" which went against the Roman view of "faith
formed by love", or "faith and works". Unlike the Reformed Churches, Lutherans
retain many of the liturgical practices and sacramental teachings of the pre-
Reformation Church, with a particular emphasis on the Eucharist, or Lord's
Supper. Lutheran theology significantly differs from Reformed theology in
Christology, the purpose of God's Law, divine grace, the concept of
perseverance of the saints, and predestination. Etymology. The name "Lutheran"
originated as a derogatory term used against Luther by Johann Eck during the
Leipzig Debate in July 1519. Eck and other Roman Catholics followed the
traditional practice of naming a heresy after its leader, thus labeling all who
identified with the theology of Martin Luther as Lutherans. Martin Luther
always disliked the term, preferring instead to describe the reform movement
with the term "Evangelical", which was derived from "euangelion", a Greek word
meaning "good news", i.e. "Gospel." Lutherans themselves began to use the term
in the middle of the 16th century in order to distinguish themselves from other
groups, such as Philippists and Calvinists. In 1597, theologians in Wittenberg
defined the title "Lutheran" as referring to the true church. History.
Lutheranism has its roots in the efforts of Martin Luther who sought to reform
the Western Church to a more biblical foundation. Spread into Northern Europe.
Lutheranism spread through all of Scandinavia during the 16th century, as the
monarch of Denmark-Norway (also ruling Iceland) and the monarch of Sweden (also
ruling Finland) adopted Lutheranism. Through Baltic-German and Swedish rule
Lutheranism also spread into the Baltic countries of Estonia and Latvia. Since
1520, regular Lutheran services have been held in Copenhagen. Under the reign
of Frederick I (1523–33), Denmark-Norway remained officially Catholic.
Although Frederick initially pledged to persecute Lutherans, he soon adopted a
policy of protecting Lutheran preachers and reformers, the most significant
being Hans Tausen. During Frederick's reign, Lutheranism made significant
inroads among the Danish population. At an open meeting in Copenhagen attended
by the king in 1536, the people shouted; "We will stand by the holy Gospel, and
do not want such bishops anymore". Frederick's son Christian was openly
Lutheran, which prevented his election to the throne upon his father's death.
However, following his victory in the civil war that followed, in 1537 he
became Christian III and advanced the Reformation in Denmark-Norway. The
constitution upon which the Danish Norwegian Church, according to the Church
Ordinance should rest was "The pure word of God, which is the Law and the
Gospel". It does not even mention the Augsburg Confession. The priests at least
had to understand the Holy Script well enough to preach and explain the Gospel
and the Epistles for their congregations. The youths were taught from the
"Small Catechism", available in Danish since 1532. They may in the end expect:
"forgiving of their sins", "to be counted as just", and "the eternal life".
Instruction is still similar. The first Bible in Danish was Martin Luther's. It
was translated by 1550 and made available in 3,000 copies. It was sold out 30
years later. Important differences from today's Roman Catholicism are the
Lutherans' refutation of the ideas that tradition is a carrier of the "Word of
God", and that only the communion of the Bishop of Rome had been entrusted to
interpret the "Word of God". The Reformation in Sweden began with Olaus and
Laurentius Petri, brothers who took the Reformation to Sweden after studying in
Germany. They led Gustav Vasa, elected king in 1523, to Lutheranism. The pope's
refusal to allow the replacement of an archbishop that supported the invading
forces opposing Gustav Vasa during the Stockholm Bloodbath led to the
discontinuance of any official connection between Sweden and the papacy in
1523. Four years later, at the Diet of Västerås, the king succeeded in
forcing the diet to accept his dominion over the national church. The king was
given possession of all church properties such as the church appointments and
the clergy. While this effectively granted official sanction to Lutheran ideas,
Lutheranism did not become official until 1593, when the Uppsala Synod declared
Holy Scripture the sole guideline for faith, with four documents accepted as
faithful and authoritative explanations of it: the "Apostles' Creed", the
"Nicene Creed", the "Athanasian Creed", and the unaltered "Augsburg Confession"
of 1530. Mikael Agricola's translation of the first "Finnish New Testament" was
published in 1548. Schmalkaldic War and the Formula of Concord. After the death
of Luther in 1546, the Schmalkaldic War started out as a conflict between two
German Lutheran rulers in 1547. Soon, Holy Roman Imperial forces joined the
battle and conquered the members of the Schmalkaldic League, oppressing and
exiling many German Lutherans as they enforced the terms of the Augsburg
Interim. Religious freedom was secured for Lutherans through the Peace of
Passau in 1552 and under the Cuius regio, eius religio and Declaratio
Ferdinandei clauses of the Peace of Augsburg in 1555. Religious disputes
between the Crypto-Calvinists, Philippists, Sacramentarians, Ubiquitarians, and
Gnesio-Lutherans raged within Lutheranism during the middle of the 16th
century. This finally ended with the resolution of the issues in the "Formula
of Concord". Large numbers of politically and religiously influential leaders
met together, debated, and resolved these topics on the basis of Scripture,
resulting in the Formula, which over 8,000 leaders signed. The "Book of
Concord" replaced earlier, incomplete collections of doctrine, unifying all
German Lutherans with identical doctrine and beginning the period of Lutheran
Orthodoxy. Lutheran orthodoxy. The historical period of Lutheran Orthodoxy is
divided into three sections: Early Orthodoxy (1580–1600), High Orthodoxy
(1600–1685), and Late Orthodoxy (1685–1730). Lutheran scholasticism
developed gradually especially for the purpose of arguing with the Jesuits, and
it was finally established by Johann Gerhard. Abraham Calovius represents the
climax of the scholastic paradigm in orthodox Lutheranism. Other orthodox
Lutheran theologians include Martin Chemnitz, Aegidius Hunnius, Leonhard
Hutter, Nicolaus Hunnius, Jesper Rasmussen Brochmand, Salomo Glassius, Johann
Hülsemann, Johann Conrad Dannhauer, Johannes Andreas Quenstedt, Johann
Friedrich König, and Johann Wilhelm Baier. Near the end of the Thirty Years'
War, the compromising spirit seen in Philip Melanchthon rose up again in
Helmstedt School and especially in theology of Georgius Calixtus, causing the
Syncretistic Controversy. Another theological issue that arose was the Crypto-
Kenotic Controversy. Late orthodoxy was torn by influences from rationalism,
philosophy based on reason, and Pietism, a revival movement in Lutheranism.
After a century of vitality, the Pietist theologians Philipp Jakob Spener and
August Hermann Francke warned that orthodoxy had degenerated into meaningless
intellectualism and Formalism, while orthodox theologians found the emotional
and subjective focuses of Pietism to be vulnerable to Rationalist propaganda.
The last famous orthodox Lutheran theologian before the rationalist
"Aufklärung", or "Enlightenment", was David Hollatz. Late orthodox theologian
Valentin Ernst Löscher took part in the controversy against Pietism. Medieval
mystical traditions continued in works of Martin Moller, Johann Arndt, and
Joachim Lütkemann. Pietism became a rival of orthodoxy but adopted some
orthodox devotional literature; for example, Arndt's, Scriver's and Prätorius'
which were combined Pietistic literature. Rationalism. Rationalist philosophers
from France and England had an enormous impact during the 18th century, along
with the German Rationalists Christian Wolff, Gottfried Leibniz, and Immanuel
Kant. Their work led to an increase in rationalist beliefs, "at the expense of
faith in God and agreement with the Bible". In 1709, Valentin Ernst Löscher
warned that this new Rationalist view of the world fundamentally changed
society by drawing into question every aspect of theology. Instead of
considering the authority of divine revelation, he explained, Rationalists
relied solely on their personal understanding when searching for truth. Johann
Melchior Goeze (1717–1786), pastor of St. Catherine's Church, Hamburg, wrote
apologetical works against Rationalists, including a theological and historical
defence against the historical criticism of the Bible. Dissenting Lutheran
pastors were often reprimanded by the government bureaucracy overseeing them,
for example, when they tried to correct Rationalist influences in the parish
school. As a result of the impact of a local form of rationalism, termed
Neology, by the latter half of the 18th century, genuine piety was found almost
solely in small Pietist conventicles. However, some of the laity preserved
Lutheran orthodoxy from both Pietism and rationalism through reusing old
catechisms, hymnbooks, postils, and devotional writings, including those
written by Johann Gerhard, Heinrich Müller, and Christian Scriver. Revivals. A
layman, Luther scholar Johann Georg Hamann (1730–88), became famous for
countering Rationalism and striving to advance a revival known as the
"Erweckung", or "Awakening". In 1806, Napoleon's invasion of Germany promoted
Rationalism and angered German Lutherans, stirring up a desire among the people
to preserve Luther's theology from the Rationalist threat. Those associated
with this "Awakening" held that reason was insufficient and pointed out the
importance of emotional religious experience. Small groups sprang up, often in
universities, which devoted themselves to Bible study, reading devotional
writings, and revival meetings. Although the beginning of this "Awakening"
tended heavily toward Romanticism, patriotism, and experience, the emphasis of
the "Awakening" shifted around 1830 to restoring the traditional liturgy,
doctrine, and confessions of the Lutheran church in the Neo-Lutheran movement.
This "Awakening" swept through all of Scandinavia except for Iceland. It
developed from both German Neo-Lutheranism and Pietism. Danish pastor and
philosopher Nikolaj Frederik Severin Grundtvig reshaped church life throughout
Denmark through a reform movement beginning in 1830. He also wrote about 1,500
hymns, including "God's Word Is Our Great Heritage". In Norway, Hans Nielsen
Hauge, a lay street preacher, emphasized spiritual discipline and sparked the
Haugean movement. In Norway, the "Awakening" drove the growth of foreign
missions to non-Christians to a new height, which has never been reached since.
In Sweden, Lars Levi Læstadius began the Laestadian movement that emphasized
moral reform. In Finland, a farmer, Paavo Ruotsalainen, began the Finnish
Awakening when he took to preaching about repentance and prayer. In 1817,
Frederick William III of Prussia ordered the Lutheran and Reformed churches in
his territory to unite, forming the Evangelical Church of the Prussian Union.
The unification of the two branches of German Protestantism sparked the Schism
of the Old Lutherans. Many Lutherans, called "Old Lutherans", chose to leave
the state churches despite imprisonment and military force. Some formed
independent church bodies, or "free churches", at home while others left for
the United States, Canada, and Australia. A similar legislated merger in
Silesia prompted thousands to join the Old Lutheran movement. The dispute over
ecumenism overshadowed other controversies within German Lutheranism. Despite
political meddling in church life, local and national leaders sought to restore
and renew Christianity. Neo-Lutheran Johann Konrad Wilhelm Löhe and Old
Lutheran free church leader Friedrich August Brünn both sent young men
overseas to serve as pastors to German Americans, while the Inner Mission
focused on renewing the situation home. Johann Gottfried Herder, superintendent
at Weimar and part of the Inner Mission movement, joined with the Romantic
movement with his quest to preserve human emotion and experience from
Rationalism. Ernst Wilhelm Hengstenberg, though raised Reformed, became
convinced of the truth of historic Lutheranism as a young man. He led the Neo-
Lutheran "Repristination School" of theology, which advocated a return to the
orthodox theologians of the 17th century and opposed modern Bible scholarship.
As editor of the periodical "Evangelische Kirchenzeitung", he developed it into
a major support of Neo-Lutheran revival and used it to attack all forms of
theological liberalism and rationalism. Although he received a large amount of
slander and ridicule during his forty years at the head of revival, he never
gave up his positions. The theological faculty at the University of Erlangen in
Bavaria became another force for reform. There, professor Adolf von Harless,
though previously an adherent of rationalism and German idealism, made Erlangen
a magnet for revival oriented theologians. Termed the "Erlangen School" of
theology, they developed a new version of the Incarnation, which they felt
emphasized the humanity of Jesus better than the ecumenical creeds. As
theologians, they used both modern historical critical and Hegelian
philosophical methods instead of attempting to revive the orthodoxy of the 17th
century. Friedrich Julius Stahl led the "High Church Lutherans". Though raised
a Jew, he was baptized as a Christian at the age of 19 through the influence of
the Lutheran school he attended. As the leader of a neofeudal Prussian
political party, he campaigned for the divine right of kings, the power of the
nobility, and episcopal polity for the church. Along with Kliefoth and Vilmar,
he promoted agreement with Roman Catholicism with regard to the authority of
the institutional church, ex opere operato effectiveness of the sacraments, and
the divine authority of clergy. Unlike Roman Catholics, however, they also
urged complete agreement with the "Book of Concord". The Neo-Lutheran movement
managed to slow secularism and counter atheistic Marxism, but it did not fully
succeed in Europe. It partly succeeded in continuing the Pietist movement's
drive to right social wrongs and focus on individual conversion. The Neo-
Lutheran call to renewal failed to achieve widespread popular acceptance
because it both began and continued with a lofty, idealistic Romanticism that
did not connect with an increasingly industrialized and secularized Europe. At
best, the work of local leaders resulted in specific areas with vibrant
spiritual renewal, but people in Lutheran areas overall continued to become
increasingly distant from church life. By 1969, Manfried Kober complained that
“unbelief is rampant” even within German Lutheran parishes. Doctrine. The
Bible. Traditionally, Lutherans hold the Bible of the Old and New Testaments to
be the only divinely inspired book, the only source of divinely revealed
knowledge, and the only norm for Christian teaching. Scripture alone is the
formal principle of the faith, the final authority for all matters of faith and
morals because of its inspiration, authority, clarity, efficacy, and
sufficiency. The authority of the Scriptures has been challenged during the
history of Lutheranism. Martin Luther taught that the Bible was the written
Word of God, and the only reliable guide for faith and practice. He held that
every passage of Scripture has one straightforward meaning, the literal sense
as interpreted by other Scripture. These teachings were accepted during the
orthodox Lutheranism of the 17th century. During the 18th century, Rationalism
advocated reason rather than the authority of the Bible as the final source of
knowledge, but most of the laity did not accept this Rationalist position. In
the 19th century, a confessional revival reemphasized the authority of the
Bible and agreement with the Lutheran Confessions. Today, Lutherans disagree
about the inspiration and authority of the Bible. Theological conservatives use
the historical-grammatical method of Biblical interpretation, while theological
liberals use the higher critical method. The 2008 U.S. Religious Landscape
Survey conducted by the Pew Research Center surveyed 1,926 adults in the United
States that self-identified as Lutheran. The study found that 30% believed that
the Bible was the Word of God and was to be taken literally word for word. 40%
held that the Bible was the Word of God, but was not literally true word for
word or were unsure if it was literally true word for word. 23% said the Bible
was written by men and not the Word of God. 7% did not know, were not sure, or
had other positions. Inspiration. Although many Lutherans today hold less
specific views of inspiration, historically, Lutherans affirm that the Bible
does not merely contain the Word of God, but every word of it is, because of
plenary, verbal inspiration, the direct, immediate word of God. The "Apology of
the Augsburg Confession" identifies Holy Scripture with the Word of God and
calls the Holy Spirit the author of the Bible. Because of this, Lutherans
confess in the "Formula of Concord", "we receive and embrace with our whole
heart the prophetic and apostolic Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments as
the pure, clear fountain of Israel." The apocryphal books were not written by
the prophets, by inspiration; they contain errors never included in the Judean
Canon that Jesus used, and therefore are not a part of Holy Scripture. The
prophetic and apostolic Scriptures are authentic as written by the prophets and
apostles. A correct translation of their writings is God's Word because it has
the same meaning as the original Hebrew and Greek. A mistranslation is not
God's word, and no human authority can invest it with divine authority. Divine
authority. Historically, Lutherans maintain that Holy Scripture, the Word of
God, carries the full authority of God. For confessional Lutherans, every
single statement of the Bible calls for instant and unqualified acceptance. For
Lutherans that are more aligned with mainline Protestantism, a basic claim is
made that the canonical Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments are the
inspired Word of God and the authoritative source and norm of its proclamation,
faith, and life. This allows for historical-critical methods for
interpretation. Clarity. Historically, Lutherans understand the Bible to
present all doctrines and commands of the Christian faith clearly. God's Word
is freely accessible to every reader or hearer of ordinary intelligence,
without requiring any special education. Of course, one must understand the
language God's Word is presented in, and not be so preoccupied by contrary
thoughts so as to prevent understanding. As a result of this, no one needs to
wait for any clergy, pope, scholar, or ecumenical council to of any part of the
Bible. Efficacy. Lutherans confess that Scripture is united with the power of
the Holy Spirit and with it, not only demands, but also creates the acceptance
of its teaching. This teaching produces faith and obedience. Holy Scripture is
not a dead letter, but rather, the power of the Holy Spirit is inherent in it.
Scripture does not compel a mere intellectual assent to its doctrine, resting
on logical argumentation, but rather it creates the living agreement of faith.
As the Smalcald Articles affirm, "in those things which concern the spoken,
outward Word, we must firmly hold that God grants His Spirit or grace to no
one, except through or with the preceding outward Word." Sufficiency. Lutherans
are confident that the Bible contains everything that one needs to know in
order to obtain salvation and to live a Christian life. There are no
deficiencies in Scripture that need to be filled with by tradition,
pronouncements of the Pope, new revelations, or present-day development of
doctrine. Law and Gospel. Lutherans understand the Bible as containing two
distinct types of content, termed Law and Gospel (or Law and Promises).
Properly distinguishing between Law and Gospel prevents the obscuring of the
Gospel teaching of justification by grace through faith alone. Lutheran
Confessions. The "Book of Concord", published in 1580, contains ten documents
which some Lutherans believe are faithful and authoritative explanations of
Holy Scripture. Besides the three Ecumenical Creeds, which date to Roman times,
the "Book of Concord" contains seven credal documents articulating Lutheran
theology in the Reformation era. The doctrinal positions of Lutheran churches
are not uniform because the "Book of Concord" does not hold the same position
in all Lutheran churches. For example, the state churches in Scandinavia
consider only the "Augsburg Confession" as a "summary of the faith" in addition
to the three ecumenical Creeds. Lutheran pastors, congregations, and church
bodies in Germany and the Americas usually agree to teach in harmony with the
entire Lutheran Confessions. Some Lutheran church bodies require this pledge to
be unconditional because they believe the confessions correctly state what the
Bible teaches. Others allow their congregations to do so "insofar as" the
Confessions are in agreement with the Bible. Justification. The key doctrine,
or material principle, of Lutheranism is the doctrine of justification.
Lutherans believe that humans are saved from their sins by God's grace alone
("Sola Gratia"), through faith alone ("Sola Fide"). Lutherans believe that this
grace is granted for the sake of Christ's merit alone ("Solus Christus").
Orthodox Lutheran theology holds that God made the world, including humanity,
perfect, holy and sinless. However, Adam and Eve chose to disobey God, trusting
in their own strength, knowledge, and wisdom. Consequently, people are saddled
with original sin, born sinful and unable to avoid committing sinful acts. For
Lutherans, original sin is the "chief sin, a root and fountainhead of all
actual sins." Lutherans teach that sinners, while capable of doing works that
are outwardly "good," are not capable of doing works that satisfy God's
justice. Every human thought and deed is infected with sin and sinful motives.
Because of this, all humanity deserves eternal damnation in hell. God in
eternity has turned His Fatherly heart to this world and planned for its
redemption because he loves all people and does not want anyone to be eternally
damned. submitted to the law for us, bore our sin, and in going to his Father
performed complete and perfect obedience for us poor sinners, from his holy
birth to his death. Thereby he covered all our disobedience, which is embedded
in our nature and in its thoughts, words, and deeds, so that this disobedience
is not reckoned to us as condemnation but is pardoned and forgiven by sheer
grace, because of Christ alone. Lutherans believe that individuals receive this
gift of salvation through faith alone. Saving faith is the knowledge of,
acceptance of, and trust in the promise of the Gospel. Even faith itself is
seen as a gift of God, created in the hearts of Christians by the work of the
Holy Spirit through the Word and Baptism. Faith receives the gift of salvation
rather than causes salvation. Thus, Lutherans reject the "decision theology"
which is common among modern evangelicals. Trinity. Lutherans are Trinitarian;
they confess in the "Nicean Creed:" the version in Evangelical Lutheran Worship
(2006) of the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America (ELCA) and the Evangelical
Lutheran Church in Canada (ELCIC) is the 1988 ecumenical (ELLC) version. But
the Lutheran Service Book(2006) of the Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod (LCMS)
and the Lutheran Church–Canada (LCC) is that of the 1662 Book of Common
Prayer with modernized spelling of the words "catholic" and "apostolic", with
changes in capitalization of these and other words, and with "Holy Spirit" in
place of "Holy Ghost". Lutherans reject the idea that the Father and the Son
are merely faces of the same person, stating that both the Old Testament and
the New Testament show them to be two distinct persons. Lutherans believe the
Holy Spirit proceeds from both the Father and the Son. "We worship one God in
Trinity, and Trinity in Unity; Neither confounding the Persons, nor dividing
the Substance. For there is one Person of the Father, another of the Son, and
another of the Holy Ghost. But the Godhead of the Father, of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost is all one: the glory equal, the majesty coeternal." Two natures
of Christ. Lutherans believe Jesus is the Christ, the savior promised in the
Old Testament. They believe he is both by nature God and by nature man in one
person, as they confess in Luther's "Small Catechism" that he is "true God
begotten of the Father from eternity and also true man born of the Virgin
Mary". he Son of God, did assume the human nature in the womb of the blessed
Virgin Mary, so that there are two natures, the divine and the human,
inseparably enjoined in one Person, one Christ, true God and true man, who was
born of the Virgin Mary, truly suffered, was crucified, dead, and buried, that
He might reconcile the Father unto us, and be a sacrifice, not only for
original guilt, but also for all actual sins of men. Sacraments. Lutherans hold
that sacraments are sacred acts of divine institution. Whenever they are
properly administered by the use of the physical component commanded by God
along with the divine words of institution, God is, in a way specific to each
sacrament, present with the Word and physical component. He earnestly offers to
all who receive the sacrament forgiveness of sins and eternal salvation. He
also works in the recipients to get them to accept these blessings and to
increase the assurance of their possession. Lutherans are not dogmatic about
the number of the sacraments. In line with Luther's initial statement in his
Large Catechism some speak of only two sacraments, Baptism and Holy Communion,
although later in the same work he calls Confession and Absolution "the third
sacrament." The definition of sacrament in the "Apology of the Augsburg
Confession" lists Absolution as one of them. Since Absolution is a return to
the forgiveness given in baptism, strictly speaking there are only two
sacraments. Confession is not practiced among Lutherans as often as in the
Roman Church. Rather, it is expected before receiving the Eucharist for the
first time. Some churches also allow for individual absolution on Saturdays
before the Eucharistic service. A general absolution (known as the Penitential
Rite) is proclaimed in the Eucharistic liturgy. Lutherans do not emphasize
"penance" as a retribution of sin but rather the proclamation of God's
forgiveness by the "called and ordained" minister of the Holy Gospel. Baptism.
Lutherans hold that Baptism is a saving work of God, mandated and instituted by
Jesus Christ. Baptism is a "means of grace" through which God creates and
strengthens "saving faith" as the "washing of regeneration" in which infants
and adults are reborn. Since the creation of faith is exclusively God's work,
it does not depend on the actions of the one baptized, whether infant or adult.
Even though baptized infants cannot articulate that faith, Lutherans believe
that it is present all the same. Because it is faith alone that receives these
divine gifts, Lutherans confess that baptism "works forgiveness of sins,
delivers from death and the devil, and gives eternal salvation to all who
believe this, as the words and promises of God declare." Holding fast to the
Scripture cited in 1 Peter 3:21 "and this water symbolizes baptism that now
saves you also—not the removal of dirt from the body but the pledge of a good
conscience toward God. It saves you by the resurrection of Jesus Christ."
Therefore, Lutherans administer Baptism to both infants and adults. In the
special section on infant baptism in his Large Catechism, Luther argues that
infant baptism is God-pleasing because persons so baptized were reborn and
sanctified by the Holy Spirit. Eucharist. Lutherans hold that within the , also
referred to as the Sacrament of the Altar, the Mass, or the Lord's Supper, the
true body and blood of Christ are truly present "in, with, and under the forms"
of the consecrated bread and wine for all those who eat and drink it, a
doctrine that the "Formula of Concord" calls the sacramental union. Conversion.
In Lutheranism, conversion or regeneration in the strict sense of the term is
the work of divine grace and power by which man, born of the flesh, and void of
all power to think, to will, or to do any good thing, and dead in sin is,
through the gospel and holy baptism, taken from a state of sin and spiritual
death under God's wrath into a state of spiritual life of faith and grace,
rendered able to will and to do what is spiritually good and, especially, made
to trust in the benefits of the redemption which is in Christ Jesus. During
conversion, one is moved from impenitence to repentance. The "Augsburg
Confession" divides repentance into two parts: "One is contrition, that is,
terrors smiting the conscience through the knowledge of sin; the other is
faith, which is born of the Gospel, or of absolution, and believes that for
Christ's sake, sins are forgiven, comforts the conscience, and delivers it from
terrors." Predestination. Lutherans adhere to divine monergism, the teaching
that salvation is by God's act alone, and therefore reject the idea that humans
in their fallen state have a free will concerning spiritual matters. Lutherans
believe that although humans have free will concerning civil righteousness,
they cannot work spiritual righteousness in the heart without the presence and
aid of the Holy Spirit. Lutherans believe Christians are "saved"; that all who
trust in Christ alone and his promises can be certain of their salvation.
According to Lutheranism, the central final hope of the Christian is "the
resurrection of the body and the life everlasting" as confessed in the
"Apostles' Creed" rather than predestination. Lutherans disagree with those who
make predestination - rather than Christ's suffering, death, and resurrection -
the source of salvation. Unlike Calvinists, Lutherans do not believe in a
predestination to damnation, usually referencing "God our Savior, who desires
all people to be saved and to come to the knowledge of the truth" as contrary
evidence to such a claim. Instead, Lutherans teach eternal damnation is a
result of the unbeliever's sins, rejection of the forgiveness of sins, and
unbelief. Divine providence. According to Lutherans, God preserves his
creation, cooperates with everything that happens, and guides the universe.
While God cooperates with both good and evil deeds, with evil deeds he does so
only inasmuch as they are deeds, but not with the evil in them. God concurs
with an act's effect, but he does not cooperate in the corruption of an act or
the evil of its effect. Lutherans believe everything exists for the sake of the
Christian Church, and that God guides everything for its welfare and growth.
The explanation of the Apostles' Creed given in the "Small Catechism" declares
that everything good that people have is given and preserved by God, either
directly or through other people or things. Of the services others provide us
through family, government, and work, "we receive these blessings not from
them, but, through them, from God." Since God uses everyone's useful tasks for
good, people should look not down upon some useful vocations as being less
worthy than others. Instead people should honor others, no matter how lowly, as
being the means God uses to work in the world. Good works. Lutherans believe
that good works are the fruit of faith, always and in every instance. Good
works have their origin in God, not in the fallen human heart or in human
striving; their absence would demonstrate that faith, too, is absent. Lutherans
do not believe that good works are a factor in obtaining salvation; they
believe that we are saved by the grace of God - based on the merit of Christ in
his suffering and death - and faith in the Triune God. Good works are the
natural result of faith, not the cause of salvation. Although Christians are no
longer compelled to keep God's law, they freely and willingly serve God and
their neighbors. Judgment and eternal life. Lutherans do not believe in any
sort of earthly millennial kingdom of Christ either before or after his second
coming on the last day. Lutherans teach that, at death, the souls of Christians
are immediately taken into the presence of Jesus, where they await the second
coming of Jesus on the last day. On the last day, all the bodies of the dead
will be resurrected. Their souls will then be reunited with the same bodies
they had before dying. The bodies will then be changed, those of the wicked to
a state of everlasting shame and torment, those of the righteous to an
everlasting state of celestial glory. After the resurrection of all the dead,
and the change of those still living, all nations shall be gathered before
Christ, and he will separate the righteous from the wicked. Christ will
publicly judge all people by the testimony of their deeds, the good works of
the righteous in evidence of their faith, and the evil works of the wicked in
evidence of their unbelief. He will judge in righteousness in the presence of
all people and angels, and his final judgment will be just damnation to
everlasting punishment for the wicked and a gracious gift of life everlasting
to the righteous. Practices. Liturgy. Lutherans place great emphasis on a
liturgical approach to worship services; although there are substantial non-
liturgical minorities, for example, the Haugean Lutherans from Norway. Martin
Luther was a great fan of Music, and this is why it forms a large part of
Lutheran services. In particular, Luther was a great fan of the composers
Josquin des Prez and Ludwig Senfl and wanted singing in the church to move away
from the "ars perfecta" (Catholic Sacred Music of the late Renaissance) and
towards singing as a "Gemeinschaft" (community). Lutheran hymns are sometimes
known as chorales. Lutheran hymnody is well known for its doctrinal, didactic,
and musical richness. Most Lutheran churches are active musically with choirs,
handbell choirs, children's choirs, and occasionally carillon groups that ring
bells in a bell tower. Johann Sebastian Bach, a devout Lutheran, composed music
for the Lutheran church. Besides the Holy Communion (Divine Service),
congregations also hold offices, which are worship services without communion.
They may include Matins, Vespers, Compline, and Easter Vigil. Private or family
offices include the Morning and Evening Prayers from Luther's "Small
Catechism". Meals are blessed with the "Common Table Prayer", , or other
prayers, and after eating the Lord is thanked, for example, with . In addition,
Lutherans use devotional books, from small daily devotionals, for example,
"Portals of Prayer", to large breviaries, including the "Breviarium Lipsiensae"
and "Treasury of Daily Prayer". In the 1970s, many Lutheran churches began
holding contemporary worship services for the purpose of evangelistic outreach.
These services were in a variety of styles, depending on the preferences of the
congregation. Often they were held alongside a traditional service in order to
cater to those who preferred contemporary worship music. Today, few but some
Lutheran congregations have contemporary worship as their sole form of worship.
Outreach is no longer given as the primary motivation; rather this form of
worship is seen as more in keeping with the desires of individual
congregations. In Finland, Lutherans have experimented with the St Thomas Mass
or Metal Mass in which traditional hymns are adapted to heavy metal. The
Lutheran World Federation, in its Nairobi Statement on Worship and Culture,
recommended every effort be made to bring church services into a more sensitive
position with regard to cultural context. Lutheran churches use hymnals as well
as electronic projection media. In 2006, both the Evangelical Lutheran Church
in America and the Lutheran Church – Missouri Synod, in cooperation with
certain foreign English speaking church bodies within their respective
fellowships, released new hymnals: Evangelical Lutheran Worship (ELCA) and
Lutheran Service Book (LCMS). Along with these, the most widely used among
English speaking congregations include: "Evangelical Lutheran Hymnary" (1996,
ELS), "The Lutheran Book of Worship" (1978, LC-USA), "Lutheran Worship" (1982,
LCMS), "Christian Worship" (1993, WELS), and "The Lutheran Hymnal" (1941,
Synodical Conference). In the Lutheran Church of Australia, the official hymnal
is the "Lutheran Hymnal with Supplement" of 1986, which includes a supplement
to the "Lutheran Hymnal" of 1973, itself a replacement for the "Australian
Lutheran Hymn Book" of 1921. Prior to this time, the two Lutheran church bodies
in Australia (which merged in 1966) used a bewildering variety of hymnals,
usually in the German language. Missions. Sizable Lutheran missions arose for
the first time during the 19th century. Early missionary attempts during the
century after the Reformation did not succeed. However, European traders
brought Lutheranism to Africa beginning in the 17th century as they settled
along the coasts. During the first half of the 19th century, missionary
activity in Africa expanded, including preaching by missionaries, translation
of the Bible, and education. Lutheranism came to India beginning with the work
of Bartholomäus Ziegenbalg, where a community totaling several thousand
developed, complete with their own translation of the Bible, catechism, their
own hymnal, and system of Lutheran schools. In the 1840s, this church
experienced a revival through the work of the Leipzig Mission, including Karl
Graul. After German missionaries were expelled in 1914, Lutherans in India
became entirely autonomous, yet preserved their Lutheran character. In recent
years India has relaxed its anti-religious conversion laws, allowing a
resurgence in missionary work. In Latin America, missions began to serve
European immigrants of Lutheran background, both those who spoke German and
those who no longer did. These churches in turn began to evangelize those in
their areas who were not of European background, including indigenous peoples.
In 1892, the first Lutheran missionaries reached Japan. Although work began
slowly and a major setback occurred during the hardships of WWII. Lutheranism
there has survived and become self-sustaining. After missionaries to China,
including those of the Lutheran Church of China, were expelled, they began
ministry in Taiwan and Hong Kong, the latter which became a center of
Lutheranism in Asia. The Lutheran Mission in New Guinea, though founded only in
1953, became the largest Lutheran mission in the world in only several decades.
Through the work of native lay evangelists, many tribes of diverse languages
were reached with the Gospel. Education. Catechism is considered basic in most
Lutheran churches. Almost all maintain Sunday Schools, and some host or
maintain Lutheran schools, at the preschool, elementary, middle, high school,
folk high school, or university level. Lifelong study of the catechism is
intended for all ages so that the abuses of the pre-Reformation Church will not
recur. Lutheran schools have always been a core aspect of Lutheran mission
work, starting with Bartholomew Ziegenbalg and Heinrich Putschasu, who began
work in India in 1706. Pastors almost always have substantial theological
educations, including Greek and Hebrew so that they can refer to the Christian
scriptures in the original language. Pastors usually teach in the common
language of the local congregation. In the U.S., some congregations and synods
historically taught in German, Danish, Finnish, Norwegian, or Swedish, but
retention of immigrant languages has been in significant decline since the
early and middle 20th century. Church fellowship. Lutherans were divided about
the issue of church fellowship for the first thirty years after Luther's death.
Philipp Melanchthon and his Philippist party felt that Christians of different
beliefs should join in union with each other without completely agreeing on
doctrine. Against them stood the Gnesio-Lutherans, led by Matthias Flacius and
the faculty at Jena. They condemned the Philippist position for indifferentism,
describing it as a "unionistic compromise" of precious Reformation theology.
Instead, they held that genuine unity between Christians and real theological
peace was only possible with an honest agreement about every subject of
doctrinal controversy. Complete agreement finally came about in 1577, after the
death of both Melanchthon and Flacius, when a new generation of theologians
resolved the doctrinal controversies on the basis of Scripture in the "Formula
of Concord" of 1577. Although they decried the visible division of Christians
on earth, orthodox Lutherans avoided ecumenical fellowship with other churches,
believing that Christians should not, for example, join together for the Lord's
Supper or exchange pastors if they do not completely agree about what the Bible
teaches. In the 17th century, Georgius Calixtus began a rebellion against this
practice, sparking the Syncretistic Controversy with Abraham Calovius as his
main opponent. In the 18th century, there was some ecumenical interest between
the Church of Sweden and the Church of England. John Robinson, Bishop of
London, planned for a union of the English and Swedish churches in 1718. The
plan failed because most Swedish bishops rejected the Calvinism of the Church
of England, although Swedberg and Gezelius, bishops of Skara, Sweden and Turku,
Finland, were in favor. With the encouragement of Swedberg, church fellowship
was established between Swedish Lutherans and Anglicans in the Middle Colonies.
Over the course of the 1700s and the early 1800s, Swedish Lutherans were
absorbed into Anglican churches, with the last original Swedish congregation
completing merger into the Episcopalians in 1846. In the 19th century, Samuel
Simon Schmucker attempted to lead the Evangelical Lutheran General Synod of the
United States toward unification with other American Protestants. His attempt
to get the synod to reject the "Augsburg Confession" in favor of his
compromising "Definite Platform" failed. Instead, it sparked a Neo-Lutheran
revival, prompting many to form the General Council, including Charles
Porterfield Krauth. Their alternative approach was “Lutheran pulpits are for
Lutheran ministers only, and Lutheran altars are for Lutheran communicants
only.” Beginning in 1867, confessional and liberal minded Lutherans in
Germany joined together to form the "Common Evangelical Lutheran Conference"
against the ever looming prospect of a state-mandated union with the Reformed.
However, they failed to reach a consensus among themselves on how much
agreement in doctrine is necessary for church union. Eventually, the fascist
German Christians movement pushed the final national merger of Lutheran, Union,
and Reformed churches into a single Reich Church, now the Evangelical Church in
Germany, in 1933. Presently, Lutherans are divided over how to interact with
other Christian denominations. Some Lutherans assert that everyone must share
the "whole counsel of God" (Acts 20:27) in complete unity (1 Cor. 1:10) before
pastors can share each other's pulpits, and before communicants commune at each
other's altars, a practice termed closed (or close) communion. On the other
hand, other Lutherans practice varying degrees of open communion and allow
preachers from other Christian denominations in their pulpits. While not an
issue in the majority of Lutheran church bodies, some of them forbid membership
in Freemasonry. Partly, this is because the lodge is viewed as spreading
Unitarianism, as the Brief Statement of the Missouri Synod reads, "Hence we
warn against Unitarianism, which in our country has to a great extent
impenetrated the sects and is being spread particularly also through the
influence of the lodges." A 1958 report from the publishing house of the
Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod states that, "Masonry is guilty of
idolatry. Its worship and prayers are idol worship. The Masons may not with
their hands have made an idol out of gold, silver, wood or stone, but they
created one with their own mind and reason out of purely human thoughts and
ideas. The latter is an idol no less than the former." The largest
organizations of Lutheran churches around the world are the Lutheran World
Federation, the International Lutheran Council, and the Confessional
Evangelical Lutheran Conference. These organizations together include the great
majority of Lutheran denominations around the globe. The Lutheran World
Federation supports the activities of Lutheran World Relief, a relief and
development agency active in more than 50 countries. The LCMS and the LCC are
members of the International Lutheran Council (ILC). The WELS and ELS are
members of the Confessional Evangelical Lutheran Conference. Many Lutheran
churches are not affiliated with the LWF, the ILC or the CELC: The
congregations of the Church of the Lutheran Confession (CLC) are affiliated
with their mission organizations in Canada, India, Nepal, Myanmar, and many
African nations; and those affiliated with the Church of the Lutheran Brethren,
are especially active doing mission work in Africa and East Asia. The Lutheran
World Federation (LWF)-aligned churches do not believe that one church is
singularly true in its teachings. According to this belief, Lutheranism is a
reform movement rather than a movement into doctrinal correctness. For that
reason, a number of doctrinally diverse LWF denominations, now largely
separated from state control, are declaring fellowship and joint statements of
agreement with other Lutheran and non-Lutheran Christian denominations. The
Lutheran World Federation and the Missouri Synod engaged in a series of
official dialogues with the Roman Catholic Church since shortly after the
Second Vatican Council. In 1999 the LWF and the Roman Catholic Church jointly
issued a statement, the "Joint Declaration on the Doctrine of Justification"
("JDDJ"), that stated that the LWF and the Roman Catholic both agreed about
certain basics of Justification and lifted certain Roman Catholic anathemas
formerly applying to the LWF member churches. The Missouri Synod has
participated in most of these talks, though not the one which produced the
"Joint Declaration" and to which they were not invited. While some Lutheran
theologians saw the "Joint Declaration" as a sign that the Roman Catholics were
essentially adopting the Lutheran position, other Lutheran theologians
disagreed, claiming that, considering the public documentation of the Roman
Catholic position, this assertion does not hold up. By contrast, the
Confessional Evangelical Lutheran Conference and International Lutheran Council
as well as some unaffiliated denominations such as the Church of the Lutheran
Confession (CLC) maintain that the orthodox confessional Lutheran churches are
the only churches with completely correct doctrine. They teach that while other
Christian churches teach partially orthodox doctrine and have true Christians
as members, the doctrines of those churches contain significant errors. More
conservative Lutherans strive to maintain historical distinctiveness while
emphasizing doctrinal purity alongside Gospel-motivated outreach. They claim
that LWF Lutherans are practicing ""fake ecumenism"" by desiring church
fellowship outside of actual unity of teaching. Although not an "ecumenical"
movement in the formal sense, in the 1990s influences from the megachurches of
American evangelicalism have become somewhat common. Many of the largest
Lutheran congregations in the United States have been heavily influenced by
these "progressive Evangelicals." These influences are sharply criticized by
some Lutherans as being foreign to orthodox Lutheran beliefs. The Porvoo
Communion is a communion of episcopally led Lutheran and Anglican churches in
Europe. Beside its membership in the Porvoo Communion, Church of Sweden also
has declared full communion with the Philippine Independent Church and the
United Methodist Church. The Evangelical Lutheran Church in America (ELCA) has
been involved in ecumenical dialogues with several denominations. Recently, the
ELCA has declared full communion with several American Churches: the Moravian
Church, the Episcopal Church, the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.), the Reformed
Church in America, the United Methodist Church, and the United Church of
Christ. Throughout the world. Today, millions belong to Lutheran churches,
which are present on all populated continents. The Lutheran World Federation
estimates the total number of Lutherans, which includes non-LWF member
churches, at approximately 75 million. In recent years, Lutheranism saw a
slight increase in its fellowship, which continues to the present. Lutheran
churches in the North America, Europe, Latin America and the Caribbean regions
are experiencing decreases and no growth in membership, while those in Africa
and Asia continue to grow. Lutheranism is the largest religious group in
Denmark, the Faroe Islands, Greenland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden, Finland,
Estonia, Latvia, Namibia, and the Dakotas. Lutheranism is also the dominant
form of Christianity in the White Mountain and San Carlos Apache nations. In
addition, Lutheranism is a main Protestant denomination in Germany (where
Protestants form about 30% of the country's total population), Lithuania,
Poland, Austria, Slovakia, Slovenia, Croatia, Serbia, Kazakhstan, Tajikistan,
Papua New Guinea, North Sumatra Indonesia, and Tanzania. Although Namibia is
the only country outside Europe to have a Lutheran majority, there are sizable
Lutheran bodies in other African countries. In the following African countries,
the total number of Lutherans exceeds 100,000: Nigeria, Central African
Republic, Chad, Kenya, Malawi, Congo, Cameroon, Ethiopia, Zimbabwe, and
Madagascar. In addition, the following nations also have sizable Lutheran
populations: the Netherlands (within the Protestant Church of the Netherlands),
Canada, the United Kingdom, France, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Slovakia,
Brazil, Malaysia, India, Indonesia, South Africa, and the United States,
especially in the heavily German and Scandinavian Upper Midwest. Lutheranism is
also a state religion in Norway, Iceland, Denmark, Greenland, and the Faroe
Islands. Finland has its Lutheran church established as a national church.
Similarly, Sweden also has its national church, which was a state church until
2000.
