Mennonite The Mennonites are a Protestant group based around the church
communities of the Christian Anabaptist denominations named after Menno Simons
(1496–1561) of Friesland (a part of the Holy Roman Empire of the German
Nation), who, through his writings, articulated and thereby formalized the
teachings of earlier Swiss founders. The teachings of the Mennonites were
founded on their belief in both the mission and ministry of Jesus Christ, which
they held to with great conviction despite persecution by the various Roman
Catholic and Protestant states. Rather than fight, the majority survived by
fleeing to neighboring states where ruling families were tolerant of their
radical belief in believer's baptism. Over the years, Mennonites have become
known as one of the historic peace churches because of their commitment to
pacifism (opposition to war and violence). In contemporary society, Mennonites
are both an ethnic group and a religious denomination. There is, however, still
ambiguity and controversy among Mennonites about this issue, with some
insisting that they are simply a religious group while others argue that they
form a distinct ethnic group. Increasingly historians and sociologists treat
Mennonites as an ethno-religious group. There are about 1.6 million Mennonites
worldwide as of 2009. Mennonite congregations worldwide embody the full scope
of Mennonite practice from "plain people" to those who are indistinguishable in
dress and appearance from the general population. The largest populations of
Mennonites are in India, Ethiopia, Canada, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the United States, but Mennonites can also be found in tight-knit
communities in at least 82 countries on six continents or scattered amongst the
populace of those countries. There are German Mennonite colonies in Argentina,
Belize, Bolivia, Brazil, Mexico, Uruguay, and Paraguay, who are to a large
extent descendants of Mennonites living in eastern Europe, and there remains a
small congregation in the Netherlands where Simons was born. The Mennonite
Disaster Service, based in North America, provides both immediate and long-term
responses to hurricanes, floods, and other disasters. The Mennonite Central
Committee provides disaster relief around the world alongside their long-term
international development programs. Other programs offer a variety of relief
efforts and services throughout the world. Since the latter part of the 20th
century, some Mennonite groups have also become more actively involved with
peace and social justice issues, helping to found Christian Peacemaker Teams
and Mennonite Conciliation Service. Radical Reformation. The early history of
the Mennonites starts with the Anabaptists in the German and Dutch-speaking
parts of central Europe. The German term is "Täufer" or "Wiedertäufer" (that
is, Again-Baptists, or Anabaptists using the Greek "ana", "again"). These
forerunners of modern Mennonites were part of the broad reaction against the
practices and theology of the Roman Catholic Church known as the Protestant
Reformation. Its most distinguishing feature is the rejection of infant
baptism, an act that had both religious and political meaning since almost
every infant born in western Europe was baptized into the Roman Catholic
Church. Other significant theological views of the Mennonites developed in
opposition to Roman Catholic views or to the views of other Protestant
reformers such as Martin Luther and Huldrych Zwingli. Some of the followers of
Zwingli's Reformed church felt that requiring church membership beginning at
birth was inconsistent with the New Testament example. They felt that the
church should be completely removed from government (the proto–free church
tradition), and that individuals should join only when willing to publicly
acknowledge belief in Jesus and the desire to live in accordance with his
teachings. At a small meeting in Zurich on January 21, 1525, Conrad Grebel,
Felix Manz, and George Blaurock, along with twelve others, baptized each other.
This meeting marks the beginning of the Anabaptist movement. In the spirit of
the times, many groups followed, preaching any number of ideas about hierarchy,
the state, eschatology, and sexual license, running from utter abandon to
extreme chastity. These movements are together referred to as the Radical
Reformation. Many government and religious leaders, both Protestant and Roman
Catholic, considered voluntary church membership to be dangerous—the concern
of some deepened by reports of the Münster Rebellion, led by a violent sect of
Anabaptists. They joined forces to fight the movement, using methods such as
banishment, torture, burning, drowning or beheading. Despite strong repressive
efforts of the state churches, the movement spread slowly around western
Europe, primarily along the Rhine. Many of the earliest Anabaptist leaders were
killed in an attempt to purge Europe of the new sect. By 1530, most of the
founding leaders had been killed for refusing to renounce their beliefs. Many
believed that God did not condone killing or the use of force for any reason
and were therefore unwilling to fight for their lives. The pacifist branches
often survived by seeking refuge in neutral cities or nations, such as
Strasbourg. Their safety, however, was often tenuous, as a shift in alliances
or an invasion could mean resumed persecution. Other groups of Anabaptists,
such as the Batenburgers, were eventually destroyed by their willingness to
fight. This played a large part in the evolution of Anabaptist theology. In the
early days of the Anabaptist movement, Menno Simons, a Catholic priest in the
Low Countries, heard of the movement and started to rethink his Catholic faith.
He questioned the doctrine of transubstantiation, but was reluctant to leave
the Roman Catholic Church. His thinking was influenced by the death of his
brother, who, as a member of an Anabaptist group, was killed when he and his
companions were attacked and refused to defend themselves. In 1536, at the age
of 40, Simons left the Roman Catholic Church. Soon thereafter he became a
leader within the Anabaptist movement. He would become a hunted man with a
price on his head for the rest of his life. His name became associated with
scattered groups of nonviolent Anabaptists whom he helped to organize and
consolidate. Fragmentation and variation. During the 16th century, the
Mennonites and other Anabaptists were relentlessly persecuted. This period of
persecution has had a significant impact on Mennonite identity. "Martyrs
Mirror", published in 1660, documents much of the persecution of Anabaptists
and their predecessors. Today, the book is still the most important book
besides the Bible for many Mennonites and Amish, in particular for the
Swiss–South German branch of the Mennonites. Persecution was still going on
until 1710 in various parts of Switzerland. Disagreements within the church
over the years led to other splits; sometimes the reasons were theological,
sometimes practical, sometimes geographical. For instance, near the beginning
of the 20th century, some members in the Amish church wanted to begin having
Sunday Schools and participate in progressive Protestant-style para-church
evangelism. Unable to persuade the rest of the Amish, they separated and formed
a number of separate groups including the Conservative Mennonite Conference.
Mennonites in Canada and other countries typically have independent
denominations because of the practical considerations of distance and, in some
cases, language. Many times these divisions took place along family lines, with
each extended family supporting their own branch. The first recorded account of
this group is in a written order by Countess Anne, who ruled a small province
in central Europe. The presence of some small groups of violent Anabaptists was
causing political and religious turmoil in her state, so she decreed that all
Anabaptists were to be driven out. The order made an exception for the non-
violent branch known at that time as the "Menists". Political rulers often
admitted the Menists or Mennonites into their states because they were honest,
hardworking and peaceful. When their practices upset the powerful state
churches, princes would renege on exemptions for military service, or a new
monarch would take power, and the Mennonites would be forced to flee for their
lives again, usually leaving everything but their families behind. Often,
another monarch in another state would grant them welcome, at least for a
while. While Mennonites in Colonial America were enjoying considerable
religious freedom, their counterparts in Europe were in the same situation they
always had been. Their well-being was dependent on the will of the ruling
monarch, who would often extend an invitation only when there was poor soil
that no one else could farm. By contrast, in The Netherlands the Mennonites
(nl: "Doopsgezinden") enjoyed a relatively high degree of tolerance. The
Mennonites often farmed and reclaimed land in exchange for exemption from
mandatory military service. However, once the land was arable again, this
arrangement would often change, and the persecution would begin again. Because
the land still needed to be tended, the ruler would not drive out the
Mennonites but would pass laws to force them to stay, while at the same time
severely limiting their freedom. Mennonites had to build their churches facing
onto back streets or alleys, and they were forbidden from announcing the
beginning of services with the sound of a bell. In addition, high taxes were
enacted in exchange for both continuing the military service exemption, and to
keep the states' best farmers from leaving. In some cases, the entire
congregation would give up their belongings to pay the tax to be allowed to
leave. If a member or family could not afford the tax, it was often paid by
others in the group. A strong emphasis on "community" was developed under these
circumstances. It continues to be typical of Mennonite churches. As a result of
frequently being required to give up possessions in order to retain individual
freedoms, Mennonites learned to live very simply. This was reflected both in
the home and at church, where their dress and their buildings were plain. The
music at church, usually simple German chorales, was performed "a cappella".
This style of music serves as a reminder to many Mennonites of their simple
lives, as well as their history as a persecuted people. Some branches of
Mennonites have retained this "plain" lifestyle into modern times. Jacob Amman
and the Amish schisms. In 1693 Jacob Amman led an effort to reform the
Mennonite church in Switzerland and South Germany to include shunning, to hold
communion more often, and other differences. When the discussions fell through,
Jacob and his followers split from the other Mennonite congregations. Amman's
followers became known as the Amish Mennonites. In later years, other schisms
among Amish Mennonites resulted in such groups as the Old Order Amish, New
Order Amish, Kaufman Amish Mennonites, Amish Mennonites, Conservative Mennonite
Conference, and Biblical Mennonite Alliance. Russian Mennonites. In 1768
Catherine the Great of Russia acquired a great deal of land north of the Black
Sea (in the present-day Ukraine) following a war with the Turks. Russian
government officials invited those Mennonites living in Prussia to come farm
the Russian steppes in exchange for religious freedom and military exemption.
Over the years the Mennonite farmers were very successful. By the beginning of
the 20th century they owned large agricultural estates and were even successful
as industrial entrepreneurs in the cities. After the Russian Revolution of 1917
and the Russian Civil War (1917–1921) all of these farms (whose owners were
called Kulaks) and enterprises were expropriated. Beyond expropriation,
Mennonites suffered severe persecution during the course of the Civil War, at
the hands of both the Bolsheviks and, particularly, the anarchists of Nestor
Makhno who saw Mennonites as privileged foreigners of the upper class and
targeted them. Hundreds of Mennonite men, women and children were murdered in
these attacks. After the war people who openly followed religion were in many
cases imprisoned. This led to a wave of Russian Mennonite emigration to the
Americas (U.S., Canada and Paraguay). When the German army invaded the Soviet
Union in the summer of 1941, many in the Mennonite community saw them as
liberators from the communist regime under which they had suffered. When the
tide of war turned, many of the Mennonites fled with the German army back to
Germany where they were accepted as "Volksdeutsche". After the war the
remainder of the Mennonite community emigrated, or (because, as the Soviets saw
it, they had "collectively collaborated" with the Germans) was forcefully
relocated to Siberia and Kazakhstan, and many were sent to Gulags. Many German-
Russian Mennonites who lived farther to the east (not western Russia) were
deported to Siberia before the German army's invasion, and were also often
placed in labor camps. In the 1990s the Russian government gave these people
the opportunity to emigrate. The Russian Mennonite immigrants in Germany
outnumber the pre-1989 community of Mennonites in Germany by 3 to 1. The
world's most conservative Mennonites (on technology) are the Russian Mennonites
of the colonies affiliated with the Lower Barton Creek Colony in Belize. These
Mennonites do not use motors, paint, or compressed air. North America.
Persecution and the search for employment forced Mennonites out of the
Netherlands eastward to Germany in the 17th century. As Quaker evangelists
moved into Germany they received a sympathetic audience among the larger of
these Dutch-Mennonite congregations around Krefeld, Altona-Hamburg, Gronau and
Emden. It was among this group of Quakers and Mennonites, living under ongoing
discrimination, that William Penn solicited settlers for his new colony. The
first permanent settlement of Mennonites in the American Colonies consisted of
one Mennonite family and twelve Mennonite-Quaker families of Dutch extraction
who arrived from Krefeld, Germany, in 1683 and settled in Germantown,
Pennsylvania. Among these early settlers was William Rittenhouse, a lay
minister and owner of the first American paper mill. Jacob Gottschalk was the
first bishop of this Germantown congregation. This early group of Mennonites
and Mennonite-Quakers wrote the first formal protest against slavery in the
United States. The treatise was addressed to slave-holding Quakers in an effort
to persuade them to change their ways. In the 18th century, 100,000 Germans
from the Palatinate, collectively known as the Pennsylvania Dutch, emigrated to
Pennsylvania. Of these, around 2,500 were Mennonites and 500 Amish. This group
settled farther west than the first group, choosing less expensive land in the
Lancaster, Pennsylvania, area. The oldest Mennonite meetinghouse in America is
the Hans Herr House in West Lampeter Township, Pennsylvania. A member of this
second group, Christopher Dock, authored "Pedagogy", the first American
monograph on education. Today, Mennonites also reside in Kishacoquillas Valley
(also known as Big Valley), a valley in Huntingdon and Mifflin counties, also
in Pennsylvania. During the Colonial period, Mennonites were distinguished from
other Pennsylvania Germans in three ways: their opposition to the American
Revolutionary War, resistance to public education, and disapproval of religious
revivalism. Contributions of Mennonites during this period include the idea of
separation of church and state and opposition to slavery. From 1812 to 1860,
another wave of immigrants settled farther west in Ohio, Indiana, Illinois and
Missouri. These Swiss-German speaking Mennonites, along with Amish, came from
Switzerland and the Alsace-Lorraine area. These immigrants, along with the
Amish of northern New York state, formed the nucleus of the Apostolic Christian
Church in the United States. "Old" Mennonite Church (MC). The Swiss-German
Mennonites that emigrated to North America in the 18th and 19th centuries
settled first in Pennsylvania, then across the midwestern states (initially
Ohio, Indiana, and Kansas) are the root to the former Mennonite Church
denomination (MC), colloquially called the "Old Mennonite Church". This
denomination had offices in Elkhart, Indiana, and was the most populous
progressive Mennonite denomination before merging with the General Conference
Mennonite Church (GCMC) in 2002. General Conference Mennonite Church. The
General Conference Mennonite Church was an association of Mennonite
congregations based in North America beginning in 1860. The conference was
formed in 1860 when congregations in Iowa invited North American Mennonites to
join together in order to pursue common goals such as education and mission
work. The conference was especially attractive to recent Mennonite and Amish
immigrants to North America and expanded considerably when thousands of Russian
Mennonites arrived in North America starting in the 1870s. Conference offices
were located in Winnipeg, Manitoba, and North Newton, Kansas. The conference
supported a seminary and several colleges. It became the second largest
Mennonite denomination with 64,431 members in 410 congregations in Canada, the
United States and South America in the 1990s. After decades of increasingly
closer cooperation with the Mennonite Church, the two groups voted to merge in
1995 and completed reorganization into Mennonite Church Canada in 2000 and
Mennonite Church USA in 2002. Alternative Service. Mennonites in Canada were
automatically exempt from any type of service during World War I by provisions
of the Order in Council of 1873, yet initially many were imprisoned for their
beliefs until this was affirmed by the government of the time. During World War
II, Mennonite conscientious objectors were given the options of noncombatant
military service, serving in the medical or dental corps under military control
or working in parks and on roads under civilian supervision. Over 95% chose the
latter and were placed in Alternative Service camps. Initially the men worked
on road building, forestry and firefighting projects. After May 1943, as a
labour shortage developed within the nation, men were shifted into agriculture,
education and industry. The 10,700 Canadian objectors were mostly Mennonites
(63%) and Doukhobors (20%). In the United States, Civilian Public Service (CPS)
provided an alternative to military service during World War II. From 1941 to
1947, 4,665 Mennonites, Amish and Brethren in Christ were among nearly 12,000
conscientious objectors who performed "work of national importance" in 152 CPS
camps throughout the United States and Puerto Rico. The draftees worked in
areas such as soil conservation, forestry, fire fighting, agriculture, social
services and mental health. The CPS men served without wages and minimal
support from the federal government. The cost of maintaining the CPS camps and
providing for the needs of the men was the responsibility of their
congregations and families. Mennonite Central Committee coordinated the
operation of the Mennonite camps. CPS men served longer than regular draftees,
not being released until well past the end of the war. Initially skeptical of
the program, government agencies learned to appreciate the men's service and
requested more workers from the program. CPS made significant contributions to
forest fire prevention, erosion and flood control, medical science and reform
of the mental health system. Schisms. Prior to migration to America,
Anabaptists in Europe were divided between those of Dutch and Swiss-German
background. However, both Dutch and Swiss groups took their name from Menno
Simons who led the Dutch group. A trickle of Dutch Mennonites began the
migration to America in 1683, followed by a much larger migration of Swiss-
German Mennonites beginning in 1707. After immigration to America, many of the
early Mennonites split from the main body of North American Mennonites and
formed their own separate and distinct churches. The first schism in America
occurred in 1778 when Bishop Christian Funk's support of the American
Revolution led to his excommunication and the formation of a separate Mennonite
group known as Funkites. In 1785 this process continued with the formation of
the orthodox Reformed Mennonite Church and continues into the 21st century.
Many of these churches were formed as a response to deep disagreements about
theology, doctrine, and church discipline as evolution both inside and outside
the Mennonite faith occurred. Many of the modern churches descended from those
groups that abandoned traditional Mennonite practices. These historical schisms
have had an influence on creating the distinct Mennonite denominations,
sometimes using mild or severe shunning to show its disapproval of other
Mennonite groups. Schools. Several Mennonite groups have their own private or
parochial schools. Conservative groups, like the Holdeman, have not only their
own schools, but their own curriculum and teaching staff (usually, but not
exclusively, young unmarried women). See also :Category:Mennonite schools.
Secondary schools. This list of secondary Mennonite Schools is not an
exhaustive list. Most are members of the Mennonite Schools Council, endorsed by
the Mennonite Education Agency. Controversy in Quebec. Quebec does not allow
these parochial schools, as the Quebec government imposes its curriculum on all
schools (public and private), as of 2007. While private schools may add
optional material to the compulsory curriculum, they may not replace it. The
Quebec curriculum is unacceptable to the parents of the only Mennonite school
in the province. They have said they will leave Quebec, after the Education
Ministry has threatened legal actions would be taken and that Youth Protection
services might become involved if the children were not to register with the
Education Ministry and either home-school using the Government approved
material, or attend a "sanctioned" school. The local population and its mayor
support the local Mennonites. The Evangelical Fellowship of Canada has also
written to the Quebec government to express its concerns about this situation.
This story has received quite a large echo in circles defending religious
freedom, so much so that the Becket Fund placed Quebec on its weekly report of
threatened religious traditions. The latest reports indicate that several
Mennonite families have already left Quebec. Sexuality, marriage, and family
mores. The Mennonite church has no formal celibate religious order similar to
monasticism, but recognizes the legitimacy of and honors both the single state
and the sanctity of marriage of its members. Single persons are expected to be
chaste, and marriage is held to be a lifelong, monogamous, faithful covenant
between a man and a woman. In conservative groups, divorce is discouraged, and
it is believed that the "hardness of the heart" of people is the ultimate cause
of divorce. Some conservative churches have disciplined members who have
unilaterally divorced their spouses outside of cases of sexual unfaithfulness
or acute abuse. Until approximately the 1960s or 1970s, before the more
widespread urbanization of the Mennonite demographic, divorce was, in fact,
quite rare. In recent times, divorce is more common, and also carries less
stigma, particularly in cases where abuse was apparent. Traditionally, very
modest dress was expected, particularly in conservative Mennonite circles.
However, as the Mennonite population became urbanized and more integrated into
the wider culture, this visible difference has disappeared outside of
conservative Mennonite groups. Some Mennonite communities embrace the idea of
the "rumspringa", or that concept that young adults (people in their teens) may
engage in rebellious behavior, often ignoring religious participation and
engaging in behaviors that are "bad" but not necessarily illegal (drinking,
partying, sneaking out, etc.). They are then expected to either conform to
community standards or leave after entering adulthood (usually around the time
they finish college, at the latest). Some expelled congregations were dually
affiliated with the Mennonite Church and the General Conference Mennonite
Church, the latter of which did not act to expel the same congregations. When
these two Mennonite denominations formally completed their merger in 2002 to
become the new Mennonite Church USA and Mennonite Church Canada denominations,
it was still not clear, in all cases, whether or not the congregations that
were expelled from one denomination, yet included in the other, are considered
to be "inside" or "outside" of the new merged denomination. Also, some
Mennonite conferences have chosen to maintain such "disciplined" congregations
as "associate" or "affiliate" congregations in the conferences, rather than to
expel such congregations. In virtually every case, a dialogue continues between
the disciplined congregations and the denomination, as well as their current or
former conferences. The Mennonite church in the Netherlands () was the first
Dutch church to have a female pastor—Anna Zernike—authorized in 1911.
Theology. The Dordrecht Confession of Faith was adopted on April 21, 1632, by
Dutch Mennonites, by Alsatian Mennonites in 1660, and by North American
Mennonites in 1725. There is no official creed or catechism of which acceptance
is required by congregations or members. However, there are structures and
traditions taught as in the Confession of Faith in a Mennonite Perspective of
Mennonite Church Canada and Mennonite Church USA. Worship, doctrine, and
tradition. There is a wide scope of worship, doctrine and traditions among
Mennonites today. This section shows the "main" types of Mennonites "as seen
from North America". It is far from a specific study of all Mennonite
classifications worldwide but it does show a "somewhat" representative sample
of the complicated classifications within the Mennonite faith worldwide.
Moderate Mennonites include the largest denominations, the Mennonite Brethren
and the Mennonite Church. In most forms of worship and practice they differ
very little from other Protestant congregations. There is no special form of
dress and no restrictions on use of technology. Worship styles vary greatly
between different congregations. There is no formal liturgy; services typically
consist of singing, scripture reading, prayer and a sermon. Some churches
prefer hymns and choirs; others make use of contemporary Christian music with
electronic instruments. Mennonite congregations are self-supporting and appoint
their own ministers. There is no requirement for ministers to be approved by
the denomination, and sometimes ministers from other denominations will be
appointed. A small sum, based on membership numbers, is paid to the
denomination, which is used to support central functions such as publication of
newsletters and interactions with other denominations and other countries. The
distinguishing characteristics of moderate Mennonite churches tend to be ones
of emphasis rather than rule. There is an emphasis on peace, on community and
service. However, members do not live in community—they participate in the
general community as "salt and light" to the world (Matt 5:13,14). The main
elements of Menno Simons' doctrine are retained, but in a moderated form.
Banning is rarely practiced and would in any event have much less effect than
those denominations where community is more tight-knit. Excommunication can
occur, and was notably applied by the Mennonite Brethren to members who joined
the military during the Second World War. Service in the military is generally
not permitted, but service in the legal profession or law enforcement is
acceptable. Outreach and help to the wider community at home and abroad is
encouraged. Mennonite Central Committee is a leader in foreign aid provision.
The Reformed Mennonite Church, with members in the United States and Canada,
represents the first division in the original North American Mennonite body.
Called the "First Keepers of the Old Way" by author Stephen Scott, the Reformed
Mennonite Church formed in the very early 19th century. Reformed Mennonites see
themselves as true followers of Menno Simons' teachings and of the teachings of
the New Testament. They have no church rules, but they rely solely on the Bible
as their guide. They insist on strict separation from all other forms of
worship and dress in conservative plain garb that preserves 18th century
Mennonite details. However, they refrain from forcing their Mennonite faith on
their children, allow their children to attend public schools, and have
permitted the use of automobiles. They are notable for being the church of
Milton S. Hershey's mother and famous for the long and bitter ban of Robert
Bear, a Pennsylvania farmer who rebelled against what he saw as dishonesty and
disunity in the leadership. Holdeman Mennonites were founded from a schism in
1859, the Church of God in Christ, Mennonite church has about 22,000 members
worldwide. They are known as Holdeman Mennonites after their founder. They
emphasize evangelical conversion and strict church discipline. They stay
separate from other Mennonite groups because of their emphasis on the one-true-
church doctrine and their use of avoidance toward their own excommunicated
members. The Holdeman Mennonites do not believe that the use of modern
technology is sin in itself, but they discourage too intensive use of internet
and avoid television, cameras and radio. Old Order Mennonites cover many
distinct groups. Some groups use horse and buggies for transportation and speak
German while others drive cars and speak English. What most Old Orders share in
common is conservative doctrine, dress, and traditions, common roots in 19th
century and early 20th century schisms, and a refusal to participate in
politics and other so-called "sins of the world". Most Old Order groups also
school their children in Mennonite-operated schools. Stauffer Mennonites or
Pike Mennonites represent one of the first and most conservative form of North
American Horse and Buggy Mennonites. They were founded in 1845, following
conflicts about how to discipline child and spousal abuse by a few Mennonite
church members. They almost immediately began to split into separate churches
themselves. Today these groups are among the most conservative of all Swiss
Mennonites outside the Amish. They stress strict separation from "the world",
adhere to "strict withdrawal from and shunning of apostate and separated
members", forbid and limit cars and technology, and wear plain clothing.
Conservative Mennonites are generally considered those Mennonites who maintain
somewhat conservative dress, although carefully accepting other technology.
They are not a unified group and are divided into various independent
conferences and fellowships such as the Eastern Pennsylvania Mennonite Church
conference. Despite the rapid changes that precipitated the Old Order schisms
in the last quarter of the 19th century, most Mennonites in the United States
and Canada retained a core of traditional beliefs based on literal
interpretation of the New Testament Scriptures as well as more external "Plain"
practices into the beginning of the 20th century. However, disagreements in the
United States and Canada between conservative and progressive (i.e. less
emphasis on literal interpretation of scriptures) leaders began in the first
half of the 20th century and continue to some extent today. Following WWII, a
conservative movement emerged from scattered separatist groups as a reaction to
the Mennonite Churches drifting away from the churches' historical traditions.
"Plain" became passé as open criticisms of traditional beliefs and practices
broke out in the 1950s and 1960s. The first conservative withdrawals from the
progressive group began in the 1950s. These withdrawals continue to the present
day in what is now the growing Conservative Movement formed from Mennonite
schisms and/or from combinations with progressive Amish groups. While Moderate
and Progressive Mennonite congregations have dwindled in size, the Conservative
Movement congregations continue to exhibit considerable growth. Other
Conservative Mennonite groups descend from the former Amish-Mennonite churches,
which split, like the Wisler Mennonites, from the Old Order Amish in the latter
part of the 19th century. (The Wisler Mennonites are a grouping descended from
the Old Mennonite Church.) There are also other Conservative Mennonite churches
that descend from more recent groups that have left the Amish like the Beachy
Amish or the Tennessee Brotherhood Churches. Progressive Mennonite churches
allow LGBT members to worship as church members and have been banned from
membership in some cases in the moderate groups as result. The Germantown
Mennonite Church in Germantown, Pennsylvania is one example of such a
progressive Mennonite church. Progressive Mennonite Churches place a great
emphasis on the Mennonite tradition's teachings on peace and non-violence.
Membership. In 2009, there were 1,616,126 Mennonites in 82 countries. The
United States had the highest number of Mennonites with 387,103 members,
followed by the Democratic Republic of the Congo with 220,444 members. The
third largest concentration of Mennonites was in Ethiopia with 172,306 members,
while the fourth largest population was in India with 156,922 members. Europe,
the birthplace of Mennonites, had 64,740 members. Africa has the highest
membership growth rate by far, with an increase of 10% to 12% every year,
particularly in Ethiopia. Growth in Mennonite membership is slow but steady in
North America, the Asia/Pacific region, and the South/Central America and
Caribbean region. Europe has seen a slow and accelerating decline in Mennonite
membership since about 1980. Some churches in North America have begun
profiling potential members and with some success have targeted inner city
minorities in their recruitment efforts. Growth in the traditional churches is
outpacing growth in the moderate churches. Organization worldwide. The most
basic unit of organization among Mennonites is the church. There are hundreds
or thousands of Mennonite churches, many of which are separate from all others.
Some churches are members of regional or area conferences. Some, but far from
all, regional or area conferences are members of larger national or world
conferences. Thus, there is no "single" authorized organization that includes
"all" Mennonite churches worldwide. Instead, there is a host of separate
churches along with a myriad of separate conferences with no particular
responsibility to any other group. Independent churches can contain as few as
50 members or as many as 20,000 members. Similar size differences occur among
separate conferences. Worship, church discipline and lifestyles vary widely
between progressive, moderate, conservative, Old Order and orthodox Mennonites
in a vast panoply of distinct, independent, and widely dispersed
classifications. For these reasons, no single group of Mennonites anywhere can
credibly claim to represent, speak for, or lead "all" Mennonites worldwide. The
Mennonite World Conference is a global community of 95 Mennonite and Brethren
in Christ Mennonite national churches from 51 countries on six continents. It
exists to "facilitate community between Anabaptist-related churches worldwide,
and relate to other Christian world communions and organizations", but it is
not a "governing body" of any kind. It is a voluntary community of faith whose
decisions are not binding on member churches. The member churches of Mennonite
World Conference include the Mennonite Brethren, the Mennonite Church USA, and
the Mennonite Church Canada, with a combined total membership of at least
400,000, or about 30% of Mennonites worldwide. Organization: North America. In
2003, there were about 323,000 Mennonites in the United States. About 110,000
were members of Mennonite Church USA churches, about 26,000 were members of
Mennonite Brethren churches, and about 40,000 were members of conservative
churches. It is not known how many Old Order Mennonites there are. Other
sources list 236,084 total United States Mennonites. Total membership in
Mennonite Church USA denominations decreased from about 133,000, before the
merger in 1998, to about 114,000 after the merger in 2003. The Mennonite Church
USA has begun profiling potential members and has been successful at recruiting
inner-city minorities into the church in several large cities in the United
States. Significant growth in the conservative churches seems to be occurring
by itself in the already existing communities. In Canada, there were approx.
130,000 Mennonite church members in 2003 - with the largest concentrations in
Manitoba, Ontario,and British Columbia. About 37,000 of those were members of
Mennonite Church Canada churches and another 35,000 of those members of
Mennonite Brethren churches. Approximately 5,000 belonged to conservative Old
Order Mennonite churches, or other ultra-conservative and orthodox churches.
The remaining 55,000 Mennonites belonged to various other Canadian churches. In
1972 Mennonites in Altona, Manitoba, established the Mennonite Thrift Shop
which has now become a world-wide source of assistance to the needy. As of
2003, there were an estimated 80,000 Old Colony Mennonites in Mexico. These
Mennonites descend from a mass migration in the 1920s of roughly 6,000 Old
Colony Mennonites from the Canadian provinces of Manitoba and Saskatchewan. In
1921, a Canadian Mennonite delegation arriving in Mexico received a
"privilegium", a promise of non-interference, from the Mexican government. This
guarantee of many freedoms was the impetus that created the two original Old
Colony settlements near Patos Nuevo Ideal, Durango, Cuauhtémoc, Chihuahua and
La Honda, Zacatecas as well as many communities in Aguascalientes.
Organization: United Kingdom. There is the United Kingdom Mennonite Ministry,
which is part of the Nationwide Mennonites from Wisconsin (USA) which meets in
Old Sodbury. There are also the British Conference of Mennonites, and the
London Mennonite Centre.
