Mormonism Mormonism is the predominant religious tradition of the Latter Day
Saint movement. This movement was founded by Joseph Smith, Jr., in the 1820s as
a form of Christian primitivism. During the 1830s and 1840s, Mormonism
gradually distinguished itself from traditional Protestantism. "Mormonism"
today represents the new, non-Protestant faith taught by Smith in the 1840s.
After Smith's death, most Mormons followed Brigham Young west, calling
themselves the The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church).
Other branches of Mormonism include Mormon fundamentalism, which seeks to
maintain practices and doctrines such as polygamy that were discontinued by the
LDS Church, and various other small independent denominations. The word
"Mormon" is derived from the Book of Mormon, one of the faith's religious
texts. Based on the name of that book, early followers of founder Joseph Smith,
Jr. were called "Mormons", and their faith was called "Mormonism". The term was
initially considered pejorative, but is no longer considered so by Mormons
(although other terms such as Latter-day Saint, or LDS, are generally
preferred). Mormonism shares a common set of beliefs with the rest of the
Latter Day Saint movement, including use of, and belief in, the Bible, as well
as other religious texts including the Book of Mormon and Doctrine and
Covenants. It also accepts the Pearl of Great Price as part of its scriptural
canon, and has a history of teaching eternal marriage, eternal progression, and
plural marriage (although the LDS Church had abandoned that practice by the
early 20th century). Cultural Mormonism includes a lifestyle promoted by the
Mormon institutions, and includes cultural Mormons who identify with the
culture, but not necessarily the theology. Brief history. Mormonism, originated
in the 1820s in western New York during a period of religious excitement known
as the Second Great Awakening. Founded by Joseph Smith, Jr., the faith drew its
first converts while Smith was dictating the text of the Book of Mormon. This
book described itself as a chronicle of early indigenous peoples of the
Americas, portraying them as believing Israelites, who had a belief in Christ
many hundred years before his birth. Smith dictated the book of 584 pages over
a period of about three months saying that he translated it from an ancient
language "by the gift and power of God". During production of this work in mid-
1829, Smith, his close associate Oliver Cowdery, and other early followers
began baptizing new converts into a Christian primitivist church, formally
organized in 1830 as the Church of Christ. Smith was seen by his followers as a
modern-day prophet. Smith later wrote that he had seen a vision of God the
Father and Jesus Christ in spring 1820 in answer to his question of which
denomination he should join. Sometimes called the "First Vision", Smith's
vision of God the Father and Jesus Christ as two separate beings was reportedly
the basis for the difference in doctrine between Mormonism's view of the nature
of God and that of orthodox Christianity. Smith further said that in answer to
his prayer the Lord instructed him to join none of the existing churches
because they were all wrong. During the 1820s Smith reported having several
angelic visitations, and by 1830 Smith said that he had been instructed that
God would use him to re-establish the true Christian church and that the Book
of Mormon would be the means of establishing correct doctrine for the restored
church. The church grew steadily, but from the beginning in 1830, its members
were persecuted. To avoid persecution from New York residents, the members
moved to Kirtland, Ohio and hoped to establish a permanent New Jerusalem or
City of Zion in Jackson County, Missouri. However, they were expelled from
Jackson County in 1833 and forced to flee Kirtland in early 1838. In Missouri,
violent conflicts with other Missourians resulted in the governor of Missouri
issuing an "extermination order," expelling Latter Day Saints from Missouri.
The displaced Mormons fled to Illinois and settled the city of Nauvoo,
Illinois, where they were able to live with a degree of peace and prosperity
for a few years. However tensions between Mormons and non-Mormons again
escalated to the point that in 1844, Smith was killed by a mob, precipitating a
succession crisis. The largest group of Mormons, or The Church of Jesus Christ
of Latter-day Saints, accepted Brigham Young as the new prophet/leader and
emigrated to what became the Utah Territory. There the church began the open
practice of plural marriage, a form of polygyny which Smith had instituted in
Nauvoo. Plural marriage became the faith's most sensational characteristic
during the 19th century, but vigorous opposition by the United States Congress
threatened the church's existence as a legal institution. In his 1890
Manifesto, church president Wilford Woodruff announced the official end of
plural marriage. Because of the formal abolition of plural marriage in 1890,
several smaller groups of Mormons broke with the LDS Church forming several
denominations of Mormon fundamentalism. Meanwhile, the LDS Church has become a
proponent of monogamy and patriotism, has extended its reach internationally by
a vigorous missionary program, and has grown in size to 14 million members. The
church is becoming a part of the American and international mainstream.
However, it consciously and intentionally retains its identity as a "peculiar
people" set apart from the world by what it believes is its unique relationship
with God. Theology. Restoration. Mormonism describes itself as falling within
world Christianity, but as a distinct restored dispensation; it characterizes
itself as the only true form of the Christian religion since the time of a
Great Apostasy that began not long after the ascension of Jesus Christ.
According to Mormons this Apostasy involved the corruption of the pure,
original Christian doctrine with Greek and other philosophies, and followers
dividing into different ideological groups. Additionally, Mormons claim the
martyrdom of the Apostles led to the loss of Priesthood authority to administer
the Church and its ordinances. Mormons believe that God re-established the
early Christian Church as found in the New Testament through Joseph Smith. In
particular, Mormons believe that angels such as Peter, James, John, and John
the Baptist appeared to Joseph Smith and others and bestowed various Priesthood
authorities on them. Mormons thus believe that their Church is the "only true
and living church" because divine authority was restored to it through Smith.
In addition, Mormons believe that Smith and his legitimate successors are
modern prophets who receive revelation from God to guide the church. They
maintain that other religions have a portion of the truth and are guided by the
Light of Christ. Cosmology. For many Mormons, Joseph Smith's cosmology is the
most attractive part of the restoration. Mormon cosmology presents a unique
view of God and the universe, and places a high importance on human agency. In
Mormonism, life on earth is just a short part of an eternal existence. Mormons
believe that in the beginning all people existed as spirits or "intelligences,"
independent of God. In this state, God came among the intelligences and offered
a plan whereby they could progress and "have a privilege to advance like
himself." The spirits were free to accept or reject this plan, and a third of
them, led by Satan rejected it. The rest accepted the plan, coming to earth and
receiving bodies with an understanding that they would experience sin and
suffering. In Mormonism, the central part of God's plan is the atonement of
Jesus Christ. Mormons believe that one purpose of earthly life is to learn to
choose good over evil. In this process, people inevitably make mistakes,
becoming unworthy to return to the presence of God. Mormons believe that Jesus
paid for the sins of the world, and that all people can be saved through his
atonement. Mormons accept Christ's atonement through faith, repentance, formal
covenants or ordinances such as baptism, and consistently trying to live a
Christ-like life. Ordinances. In Mormonism, an ordinance is a religious ritual
of special significance, often involving the formation of a covenant with God.
Ordinances are performed by the authority of the priesthood and in the name of
Jesus Christ. The term has a meaning roughly similar to that of the term
"sacrament" in other Christian denominations. Saving ordinances (or ordinances
viewed as necessary for salvation) include: baptism by immersion after the age
of accountability (normally age 8); confirmation and reception of the gift of
the Holy Ghost, performed by laying hands on the head of a newly baptized
member; ordination to the Aaronic and Melchizedek priesthoods for males; an
endowment (including washing and anointing) received in temples; and marriage
(or sealing) to a spouse. Mormons renew their baptismal covenants through
weekly participation in the Lord's supper (commonly called sacrament). Mormons
also perform other ordinances, which include naming and blessing children,
giving priesthood blessings and patriarchal blessings, anointing and blessing
the sick, participating in prayer circles, and setting apart individuals who
are called to church positions. In Mormonism, the saving ordinances are seen as
necessary for salvation, but they are not sufficient in and of themselves. For
example, baptism is required for exaltation, but simply having been baptized
does not guarantee any eternal reward. The baptized person is expected to be
obedient to God's commandments, to repent of any sinful conduct subsequent to
baptism, and to receive the other saving ordinances. Because Mormons believe
that everyone must receive certain ordinances to be saved, Mormons perform
ordinances on behalf of deceased persons. These ordinances are performed
vicariously or by "proxy" on behalf of the dead. In accordance with their
belief in each individual's "free agency", living or dead, Mormons believe that
the deceased may accept or reject the offered ordinance in the spirit world,
just as all spirits decided to accept or reject God's plan originally. In
addition, these "conditional" ordinances on behalf of the dead are performed
only when a deceased person's genealogical information has been submitted to a
temple and correctly processed there before the ordinance ritual is performed.
Only ordinances for salvation are performed on behalf of deceased persons.
Scripture. Mormons believe in the Old and New Testaments, and the LDS Church
uses the King James Bible as its official scriptural text of the Bible. While
Mormons believe in the general accuracy of the modern day text of the Bible,
they also believe that it is incomplete and that errors have been introduced.
In Mormon theology, many lost truths are restored in the Book of Mormon, which
Mormons hold to be divine scripture and equal in authority to the Bible. The
Mormon scriptural canon also includes a collection of revelations and writings
contained in the Doctrine and Covenants and the Pearl of Great Price. These
books, as well as the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible, have varying
degrees of acceptance as divine scripture among different denominations of the
Latter Day Saint movement. Revelation. In Mormonism, continuous revelation is
the principle that God or his divine agents still continue to communicate to
mankind. This communication can be manifest in many ways: influences of the
Holy Ghost (the principal form in which this principle is manifest), visions,
visitations of divine beings, and others. Joseph Smith used the example of the
Lord's revelations to Moses in Deuteronomy to explain the importance of
continuous revelation. Mormons believe that Smith and subsequent church leaders
could speak scripture "when moved upon by the Holy Ghost." In addition, many
Mormons believe that ancient prophets in other regions of the world received
revelations that resulted in additional scriptures that have been lost and may,
one day, be forthcoming. In Mormonism, revelation isn't limited to church
members alone. For instance, Latter Day Saints believe that the United States
Constitution is a divinely inspired document. Mormons are encouraged to develop
a personal relationship with the Holy Ghost and receive personal revelation for
their own direction and that of their family. The Latter Day Saint concept of
revelation includes the belief that revelation from God is available to all
those who earnestly seek it with the intent of doing good. It also teaches that
everyone is entitled to "personal" revelation with respect to his or her
stewardship (leadership responsibility). Thus, parents may receive inspiration
from God in raising their families, individuals can receive divine inspiration
to help them meet personal challenges, church officers may receive revelation
for those whom they serve. The important consequence of this is that each
person may receive confirmation that particular doctrines taught by a prophet
are true, as well as gain divine insight in using those truths for their own
benefit and eternal progress. In the church, personal revelation is expected
and encouraged, and many converts believe that personal revelation from God was
instrumental in their conversion. Relation to mainstream Christianity.
According to Bruce McConkie, a general authority of the LDS Church, "Mormonism
is indistinguishable from Christianity." In many ways, however, the religion
differs from Christian orthodoxy as held by Catholic, Orthodox, and Protestant
Christianity. To those for whom Christianity is defined by that orthodoxy,
Mormonism's differences place it outside the umbrella of Christianity
altogether. Since its beginnings, the faith has proclaimed itself to be
Christ's Church restored with its original authority, structure and power;
maintaining that existing denominations believed incorrect doctrines and were
not acknowledged of God as his church and kingdom. Though the religion quickly
gained a large following of Christian seekers, in the 1830s, many American
Christians came to view the church's early doctrines and practices as
politically and culturally subversive, as well as doctrinally heretical,
abominable, and condemnable. This discord led to a series of sometimes-deadly
conflicts between Mormons and others who saw themselves as orthodox Christians.
Although such violence declined over the twentieth century, the religion's
unique doctrinal views and practices still generate criticism, sometimes
vehemently so. These gives rise to efforts by Mormons and opposing types of
Christians to proselytize each other. Mormons believe in Jesus Christ as the
literal firstborn Son of God and Messiah, his crucifixion as a conclusion of a
sin offering, and subsequent resurrection. However, Latter-day Saints (LDS)
reject the ecumenical creeds and definition of the Trinity (In contrast, the
second largest Latter Day Saint denomination, the Community of Christ, is
Trinitarian and monotheistic.) Mormons hold that the New Testament prophesied
both the apostasy from the teachings of Christ and his apostles as well as the
restoration of all things prior to the second coming of Christ. Some notable
differences with mainstream Christianity include: A belief that Jesus began his
atonement in the garden of Gethsemane and continued it to his crucifixion,
rather than the orthodox belief that the crucifixion alone was the physical
atonement; and an afterlife with three degrees of glory, with hell (often
called spirit prison) being a temporary repository for the wicked between death
and the resurrection. Additionally, Mormons don't believe in creation ex
nihilo, believing that matter is eternal, and creation involved God organizing
existing matter. Much of the Mormon belief system is oriented geographically
around the North and South American continents. Mormons believe the people of
the Book of Mormon lived in the western hemisphere, that Christ appeared in the
western hemisphere after his death and resurrection, that the true faith was
restored in upstate New York by Joseph Smith, that the Garden of Eden was
located in North America, and that the New Jerusalem would be built in
Missouri. For this and other reasons, including a belief by many Mormons in
American exceptionalism, Molly Worthen speculates that this may be why Leo
Tolstoy described Mormonism as the "quintessential 'American religion'".
Relation to Judaism. Although Mormons do not claim to be part of Judaism,
Mormon theology claims to situate Mormonism within the context of Judaism to an
extent that goes beyond what most other Christian denominations claim. The
faith incorporates many Old Testament ideas into its theology, and the beliefs
of Mormons sometimes parallel those of Judaism and certain elements of Jewish
culture. In the earliest days of Mormonism, Joseph Smith taught that the
Indigenous peoples of the Americas were members of some of the Lost Tribes of
Israel. Later, he taught that Mormons were Israelites, and that they may learn
of their tribal affiliation within the twelve Israelite tribes. Members of the
LDS Church receive Patriarchal blessings which declare the recipient's lineage
within one of the tribes of Israel. The lineage is either through true blood-
line or adoption. The LDS Church teaches that if one is not a direct descendant
of one of the twelve tribes, upon baptism he or she is adopted into one of the
tribes. Patriarchal blessings also include personal information which is
revealed through a patriarch by the power of the priesthood. The Mormon
affinity for Judaism is expressed by the many references to Judaism in the
Mormon liturgy. For example, Smith named the largest Mormon settlement he
founded "Nauvoo", which means "to be beautiful" in Hebrew. Brigham Young named
a tributary of the Great Salt Lake the "Jordan River". The LDS Church created a
writing scheme called the Deseret Alphabet, which was based, in part, on
Hebrew. Currently, the LDS Church has a Jerusalem Center in Israel, where
students focus their study on Near Eastern history, culture, language, and the
Bible. There has been some controversy involving Jewish groups who see the
actions of some elements of Mormonism as offensive. In the 1990s, Jewish groups
vocally opposed the LDS practice of baptism for the dead on behalf of Jewish
victims of the Holocaust and Jews in general. According to LDS Church general
authority Monte J. Brough, "Mormons who baptized 380,000 Holocaust victims
posthumously were motivated by love and compassion and did not understand their
gesture might offend Jews...they did not realize that what they intended as a
'Christian act of service' was 'misguided and insensitive'". Mormons believe
that when the dead are baptized through proxy, they have the option of
accepting or rejecting the ordinance. Relation to Islam. Since its origins in
the 19th century, Mormonism has been compared to Islam, often by detractors of
one religion or the other. For instance, Joseph Smith was referred to as "the
modern Mahomet" by the "New York Herald", shortly after his murder in June
1844. This epithet repeated a comparison that had been made from Smith's
earliest career, one that was not intended at the time to be complimentary.
Comparison of the Mormon and Muslim prophets still occurs today, sometimes for
derogatory or polemical reasons but also for more scholarly (and neutral)
purposes. While Mormonism and Islam certainly have many similarities, there are
also significant, fundamental differences between the two religions.
Mormon–Muslim relations have been historically cordial, seldom involving
Islamophobia or Anti-Mormonism; recent years have seen increasing dialogue
between adherents of the two faiths, and cooperation in charitable endeavors,
especially in the Middle and Far East. Islam and Mormonism both originate in
the Abrahamic traditions. Both believe that Christianity as originally
established by Jesus Christ was a true religion, but that it subsequently
became deformed to the point that it was beyond simple reformation. Hence, each
religion sees its founder (Muhammad for Islam, and Joseph Smith for Mormonism)
as being a true prophet of God, called to re-establish the true faith. In
addition, both prophets received visits from an angel, leading to additional
books of scripture. Both religions share a high emphasis on family life,
charitable giving, chastity, abstention from alcohol, and a special reverence
for, though not worship of, their founding prophet. Before the 1890 Manifesto
against plural marriage, Mormonism and Islam also shared in the belief in and
practice of plural marriage, a practice now held in common by Islam and various
branches of Mormon fundamentalism. The religions differ significantly in their
views on God. Islam insists upon the complete oneness and uniqueness of God
(Allah), while Mormonism asserts that the Godhead is made up of three distinct
"personages." Mormonism sees Jesus Christ as the promised Messiah and the
literal Son of God, while Islam insists that the title "Messiah" means that
Jesus (or "Isa") was a prophet sent to establish the true faith, not that he
was the Son of God or a divine being. Despite opposition from other Christian
denominations, Mormonism identifies itself as a Christian religion, the
"restoration" of primitive Christianity. Islam does not refer to itself as
"Christian", asserting that Jesus and all true followers of Christ's teachings
were (and are) Muslims–a term that means "submitters to God"–not Christians
as the term is used today. Islam proclaims that its prophet Muhammad was the
"seal of the prophets", and that no further prophets would come after him.
Mormons, though honoring Joseph Smith as the first prophet in modern times, see
him as just one in a long line of prophets, with Jesus Christ being the premier
figure of the religion. Theological divisions. Mormon theology includes three
main movements. By far the largest of these is "mainstream Mormonism", defined
by the leadership of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS
Church). The two broad movements outside mainstream Mormonism are Mormon
fundamentalism, and liberal reformist Mormonism. Mainstream Mormon theology.
Mainstream Mormonism is defined by the leadership of The Church of Jesus Christ
of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) which identifies itself as Christian. Members
of the LDS Church consider their top leaders to be prophets and Apostles, and
are encouraged to accept their positions on matters of theology, while seeking
confirmation of them through personal study of the Book of Mormon and the
Bible. Personal prayer is encouraged as well. The LDS Church is by far the
largest branch of Mormonism. It has continuously existed since the succession
crisis of 1844 that split the Latter Day Saint movement after the death of
founder Joseph Smith, Jr. Presently, the LDS Church seeks to distance itself
from other branches of Mormonism, particularly those that practice polygamy.
The church maintains a degree of orthodoxy by excommunicating or disciplining
its members who take positions or engage in practices viewed as apostasy. For
example, the LDS Church excommunicates members who practice polygamy or who
adopt the beliefs and practices of Mormon fundamentalism. Mormon
fundamentalism. One way Mormon fundamentalism distinguishes itself from
mainstream Mormonism is through the practice of plural marriage.
Fundamentalists initially broke from the LDS Church after that doctrine was
discontinued around the beginning of the 20th century. Mormon fundamentalism
teaches that plural marriage is a requirement for exaltation (the highest
degree of salvation), which will allow them to live as gods and goddesses in
the afterlife. Mainstream Mormons, by contrast, believe that a single Celestial
marriage is necessary for exaltation. Mormon fundamentalists believe that these
principles were wrongly abandoned or changed by the LDS Church, in large part
due to the desire of its leadership and members to assimilate into mainstream
American society and avoid the persecutions and conflict that had characterized
the church throughout its early years. Others believe that it was a necessity
at some point for "a restoration of all things" to be a truly restored Church.
Liberal reformist theology. Some LDS Church members have worked towards a
liberal reform of the church. Others have left the LDS Church but consider
themselves to be cultural Mormons. Others have formed new religions (most of
them now defunct). For instance, the Godbeites broke from the LDS Church in the
late 19th century on the basis of both political and religious liberalism, and
in 1985 the Restoration Church of Jesus Christ broke from the LDS Church as an
LGBT-friendly denomination.
