Neocatechumenal Way The Neocatechumenal Way, also known as the
Neocatechumenate, NCW or, colloquially, The Way, is a group within the Catholic
Church that focuses on the formation of Christian adults. It was formed in
Madrid in 1964 by Kiko Argüello and Carmen Hernández and received approval
from the Holy See in 2008. Taking its inspiration from the catechumenate of the
early Catholic Church, by which converts from paganism were prepared for
baptism, it provides post-baptismal formation to adults who are already members
of the Church. It also runs 85 seminaries in various locations, and is
responsible for hundreds of "families in mission," living in many cities around
the World. The Neocatechumenate is implemented in small, parish-based
communities of between 20-50 people. There are around 40,000 such communities
throughout the World, with an estimated million members. History of the
Neocatechumenal Way. The Neocatechumenal Way arose in 1964 through the work of
Francisco "Kiko" Argüello and Carmen Hernández to evangelize the slums of
Madrid. As time passed, their message was embodied in a catechetical synthesis,
founded on what they called the "tripod" ("Word of God-Liturgy-Community"),
seeking to lead people to fraternal communion and mature faith. This new
catechetical experience, born in the wake of the Second Vatican Council,
attracted the interest of Madrid's Archbishop, :es:Casimiro Morcillo, who
encouraged Argüello to spread it to parishes that asked for it. The Way thus
spread gradually through the Archdiocese of Madrid and to other Spanish
dioceses. In 1968, Argüello and Hernández arrived in Rome and settled in the
Borghetto Latino. With the permission of Angelo Dell'Acqua, Vicar-General of
Rome, the first catechesis began in the parish of Our Lady of the Blessed
Sacrament and the Canadian Martyrs. Since then, the Way has continued to spread
to dioceses and mission countries around the world. Leadership and governance.
The Neocatechumenate is led by the "International Responsible Team of the Way":
Argüello, Hernández, and Fr. Mario Pezzi, a priest of the Diocese of Rome.
Under the terms of the 2007 statute, the three members of this leadership team
will remain in place for life, after which an electoral college of senior
neocatechumenal catechists will elect a new team which, with the approval of
the Pontifical Council for the Laity, will have a mandate to lead the Way for a
period of seven years until new elections are held. Leadership at national and
regional levels rests in approximately seven hundred teams of "itinerant
catechists," comprising a priest and two or three laymen, appointed and
supervised by the International Responsible Team. Depending on the number of
communities in a particular area, a team of Itinerant Catechists may be
responsible for the implementation of the NC Way in a country, a group of
countries or a region of a country. Pope John Paul II summarized the role of
the itinerant catechists in December 1985:L'Osservatore Romano, 11 December
1985 (Italian edition) The itinerant catechists do not make any formal
commitment to their missionary role, and are free to resign at any time. In
June 2008 the Statutes of the Neocatechumenal Way received final approval from
the Vatican. Nature and mission of the Neocatechumenal communities. The Way
describes itself as a community—it resists terms such as organization or
movement—“at the service of the Bishops as a form of diocesan
implementation of Christian initiation and of ongoing education in faith, in
accordance with the indications of the Second Vatican Council and the
Magisterium of the Church”. It provides an ongoing education in faith and a
service of catechesis. From the initial catechesis, it typically takes several
years and passing through stages of faith formation in the local communities,
until a member reaches the renewal of the baptismal vows (or the baptism). It
is implemented in dioceses under the jurisdiction the bishop and the guidance
of the Responsible Team of the Way “according to the lines proposed by its
initiators”. Missionary activity. Responding to secularization the Way
introduced a program called "families in mission": Families serving to
establish the presence of the Catholic Church in countries where there is none
(this is referred as "Implantatio Ecclesiae") or to strengthen the presence of
Catholic communities in particularly difficult areas. On January 12, 2006,
about 200 families met with Pope Benedict XVI asking for a missionary mandate
before beginning their mission to France, Belgium, Germany and China—bringing
the number Families in Mission to more than five-hundred. In March 2008 the Way
met with nine cardinals and 160 European bishops at the Domus Galilaeae
International Center on the Mount of Beatitudes in Galilee. Christoph Cardinal
Schönborn said that during "the last 40 years Europe has said ‘no’ to its
future three times: in 1968 when it rejected 'Humanae Vitae'; then, 20 years
later, with the legalization of abortion; and today with homosexual marriages."
He called the Neocatechumenal Way an "answer of the Holy Spirit to this
situation." A joint declaration from the bishops said "we have an important
proposal, the proposal of the Neocatechumenal Way, which is to renew the life
of the family." On January 10, 2009, the pope met with over 10,000 people for a
celebration marking the 40th anniversary of the Neocatechumenal Way in Rome.
From this celebration several whole communities were sent on mission, along
with itinerant catechists, mission families, and the "Missio Ad Gentes" (a
newer form of mission that sends three to five families to a particular area at
the request of the bishop). The World Youth Days. Every three years, the World
Youth Day has been organized by the Roman Catholic Church, during which the
Pope summons youths from all over the world to a chosen city. The Way has been
an active supporter of these, rallying its young members to attend. For
instance, during World Youth Day 2008 held in Sydney, George Cardinal Pell said
that of the 110,000 international visitors that attended, 40,000 were from the
Neocatechumenal Way, and some 300,000 attended Madrid World Youth Day. During
the event, young members of the Neocatechumenal Way meet with Argüello for a
"vocational call." In Sydney, for example, approximately 1,500 men answered the
call for the priesthood and 850 young women stood up to show their willingness
to a consecrated life, and in Bonn (2005) around 1,500 young men and another
900 young women answered the call. These young men and women begin a process of
discernment in their own dioceses and communities, which may lead to priesthood
(most of the priestly vocations go to a "Redemptoris Mater" seminary) or
consecrated life. The Neocatechumenal Way in the Eastern Rites and the Holy
Land. During the Neocatechumenal Way vocational meeting held near the Sea of
Galilee following Pope Benedict XVI's visit to the Holy Land in May 2009,
Arguello described the Way's situation in the Holy Land, claiming thirty
communities that follow several different Christian rites, and holding them up
as an example of the ecumenical breakthrough. There are seven communities
following the Latin Rite, in Jaffa, Tel Aviv, Jerusalem, Nazareth, Betlehem and
Cana. In March 2000, the Way opened its Domus Galilaeae formation center on the
slopes of the Mount of Beatitudes in Israel. The facility is used for studies
and retreat, Christian seminars and conventions. In June 2007, Archbishop Elias
Chacour proposed the establishment of a new "branch" of the Neocatechumenal Way
"to work specifically in the Eastern-rite Church." Archbp. Chacour stated in
his message that he has searched for ""someone or some community to preach the
Good News to my parishioners"" as an answer to proselytism of the sects, and
that the Neocatechumenal Way is an answer. A spokesman for the Way reported the
letter to ZENIT, saying that ""We share the sense of urgency expressed by
Archbishop Chacour to evangelize 'the living stones' in the land of the Lord.""
The Greek Catholic (Melchite) rite runs a Redemptoris Mater Seminary within
Domus Galilaeae, and has 12 neocatechumenal communities in several Palestinian
villages: three each in Shefamer, Tarshiha and Melia, two in Ibilin and one in
Cana. Additionally, there are two Maronite communities in Gish and Haifa, as
well as two Hebrew-speaking communities in Haifa and Tel Aviv. The Redemptoris
Mater Seminaries. The Way also operates several seminaries dubbed "Redemptoris
Mater" seminaries which combines the priestly formation found in a seminary
with the Christian formation received in a neocatechumenal community. Potential
candidates often undergo a time of "Pre Vocational Center" before entering the
seminary, which operates somewhat in the manner of a pre-med course, designed
to prepare and awaken their vocations. The intent was to establish a seminary
that was both "international", i.e. with vocations coming from different
nations, and "missionary", i.e. upon ordination, the priests are available to
go wherever their ordinary sends them, In 1988, the first Redemptoris Mater
Seminary was established in Rome by Ugo Cardinal Poletti, and today there are
Redemptoris Mater Seminaries all over the world in places such as Managua
(Nicaragua), Rome (Italy), Newark (NJ, USA), Madrid (Spain), Berlin (Germany),
Guam, Sarajevo (Bosnia and Hercegovina), Santo Domingo (Dominican Republic),
and Warsaw (Poland). The Statutes and the Catechetical Directory. In 1997, Pope
John Paul II "encouraged and Hernández to examine their thirty-year experience
of the Way, and to formalize it with a written statute," and Joseph Cardinal
Ratzinger urged the drafting of the Statutes as "a very important step that
will open the way to the formal juridical recognition by the Church, and giving
you a further guarantee of the authenticity of your charism" The Statutes
drafted in response were approved "ad experimentum" for five years in 2002, and
on June 13, 2008, after review by five dicasteries and the Pontifical Council
for the Laity, Stanislaw Cardinal Rylko published a decree containing the
definitive approval of the statutes of the Neocatechumenal Way. The "Statutes"
describe the nature of the Way and regulate its charism and specific tasks
within the Church. Through them the Neocatechumenal Way was endowed with
"public juridical personality" status. The Way is thus closely governed by an
ecclesiastical authority, performs entrusted functions "in the name of the
church," and that it has no material goods of its own. Inter alia, in article
13, the Statutes stated that the Masses of the communities must be "open also
to other faithful"; that communion must be received "standing"; that for the
biblical readings, only "brief monitions" of introduction are permitted, apart
from the homily. The Statutes refer to a "Catechetical Directory", which
received Vatican approval at the end of 2010. This originated with thirteen
volumes of materials published by Argüello in 1972, based on his and
Hernández's preaching, and titled the "Orientations for the Teams of
Catechists". The "Orientations" were held in secret until 1997 when Cardinal
Ratzinger ordered that they be handed over to the Congregation for the Doctrine
of the Faith for a doctrinal examination. The examination lasted until 2003,
during which the Congregation made corrections and introduced about 2,000
references to parallel passages in the Catechism of the Catholic Church. After
thorough examination by various Vatican dicasteries, on December 26, 2010 the
Pontifical Council for the Laity approved the text of the catecheses which are
handed on to neo-catechumens during their itinerary. Pope Benedict XVI praised
the approval: "With these ecclesiastical seals, the Lord confirms today and
entrusts to you again this precious instrument that is the Way, so that you
can, in filial obedience to the Holy See and to the pastors of the Church,
contribute, with new impetus and ardor, to the radical and joyful rediscovery
of the gift of baptism and to offer your original contribution to the cause of
the New Evangelization.". Liturgy. The way regards liturgy as one of its three
fundamental elements ("tripod"), along with the word of God and Christian
community. The Paschal Mystery, celebrated in the "Sacred Triduum", is seen as
a liturgical axis and source of Christian life and a fulcrum of the
Neocatechumenate which leads to "rediscovery" of Christian initiation. After
the Easter liturgical celebrations, the most important place is given to the
Eucharist, which completes Christian initiation and builds a small community in
which catechumens follow their "itinerary." Four features of the Masses of the
communities have been observed. The Congregation for Divine Worship and the
Discipline of the Sacraments has watched the Way's liturgical practices from
the beginning. Pope John Paul II celebrated the Eucharist at the meeting with
the communities in Porto San Giorgio in 1989, exactly as the communities do it,
including the communion rite in a sitting position. Cardinal Francis Arinze,
however, the Prefect of the Congregation from 2002 until 2008, was unwilling to
accept the differences in the liturgy of the neocatechumenal Eucharist. In
December 2005, he wrote a private letter to Arguello, Hernández and Pezzi on
behalf of Pope Benedict. He warned that "n the celebration of the Holy Mass,
the Neocatechumenal Way shall accept and follow the liturgical books approved
by the Church, without omitting or adding anything." The letter directed
members of the Way to adopt the prescribed method of receiving Holy Communion,
to participate in parish life, and to celebrate Mass with the rest of the
parish community on at least one Sunday each month. The Way argues that Card.
Arinze's letter has been superseded by the Final Statute of the Neocatechumenal
Way insofar as it says that “the celebrations of the Eucharist of the
neocatechumenal communities on Saturday evening are part of the Sunday
liturgical pastoral work of the parish and are open also to other faithful.”
The Way argues that this means that by participating in the Saturday evening
Eucharistic celebration with their communities, members of the Neocatechumenal
Way are already partaking in the Holy Mass of the parish community. In his
"Canonical Observations on the Definitive Approval of the Statutes of the
Neocatechumenal Way", Msgr. Juan Arrieta, Secretary of the Pontifical Council
for Legislative Texts, summarizes the liturgical concessions of the
Neocatechumenal Way as follows: In an interview with the Spanish newspaper "La
Razón", Antonio Cardinal Cañizares, current Prefect of the Congregation for
Divine Worship, expressed his view on the Eucharistic celebration of the
Neocatechumenal Way: The Statutes also mention the sacrament of Penance
celebrated according to the rite of reconciliation for multiple penitents, with
individual confession and absolution. Criticisms. The Neocatechumenal Way has
encountered resistance and criticism from both clergy and theologians. After
the Neocatechumenate was introduced into the parish of St Germain-des-Prés in
Paris, for example, the Archbishop of Paris, François Cardinal Marty, blocked
any further expansion before his retirement in 1981, and similar controversy in
1992 prompted the Bishop of Nancy to transfer the neocatechumenals to a
different. In the East, bishops suspended the Way's activities in Nepal in
2011, and in the Philippines in 2010. The orthodoxy of the Way's teachings and
the validity of its liturgical practices has also drawn criticism. In 1995, the
Italian Passionist priest and theologian Enrico Zoffoli published a critique of
the Way that accused the movement of heresy: “Their doctrine is seriously
compromised with errors against fundamental dogmatics of the Church, the Popes
and the Councils. They negate the Redemption, the sacrificial character of the
Eucharist, the transubstantiation, etc... they misunderstand the sin and the
Grace concepts... their doctrinal statements are fundamentally wrong.”
Zoffoli warned that "the building of Neocatechumenal seminaries, where
candidates are prepared for the priesthood educated in accordance with the
doctrinal errors of Kiko, could be one of the worst threats for the Church of
tomorrow.". The Way has not officially responded to the accusations of heresy,
relying on declarations by the Holy See. They maintain that the Holy See's
decisions to approve the Statutes and the "Orientations for the Teams of
Catechists" speak for themselves, indicating that the Church approves not only
of the Way's structure by also its teachings. Another area for concern has been
the allegations that the Way could have a divisive impact on parishes into
which it moves. The Neocatechumenal communities are made up of people from the
parish however they do not celebrate their Masses on Sunday with the community
but on Saturday evening with a Vigil Mass, with their respective communities.
In 1994, the Diocese of Clifton undertook an extensive investigation of the
communities, and concluded that the movement was "a form of spiritual
enslavement" and that its presence in parishes was "completely divisive and
destructive." Bishop Mervyn Alexander issued a decree the next year banning the
Neocatechumenal Way from further activity in the diocese. Archbishop Peter
Takeo Okada has described the Way's presence in Japan’s small Catholic
community as "a serious problem" and "divisive and confrontational". Staff and
students of the Takamatsu Redemptoris Mater seminary relocated to Rome in 2009
and in 2010, the Japanese episcopal conference asked the Way to suspend its
activities in Japan for five years. Regional Statistics. The following table
contains statistics for the number of communities in Europe, the Americas, the
Middle East and other countries. Communities are established in a parish within
a diocese, and each community usually consists of between 20 to 50 people. (The
details shown may not be up to date) The highest number of communities found in
Europe (and the World) are found in Italy (10,000 communities) and Spain (7,000
communities). The highest number of communities in the world in a country per
capita is found in Malta, which has 100 communities in an island of 400,000
persons, which is the equivalent of twice the number of communities both in
Italy and in Spain.
