New Kadampa Tradition The New Kadampa Tradition ~ International Kadampa
Buddhist Union (NKT—IKBU) is a global Buddhist organisation founded by Geshe
Kelsang Gyatso in England in 1991. In 2003 the words "International Kadampa
Buddhist Union" (IKBU) were added to the original name "New Kadampa Tradition".
The NKT-IKBU is an international organization registered in England as a
charitable, or non-profit, company. It currently lists more than 200 centres
and around 900 branch classes/study groups in 40 countries. The NKT-IKBU is a
Mahayana form of Buddhism, which has been developed from the Gelug school of
Tibetan Buddhism. The NKT-IKBU follows the tradition of Kadampa Buddhism
derived from the Buddhist meditators and scholars Atisha (AD 982–1054) and Je
Tsongkhapa (1357–1419 AD), as taught by Kelsang Gyatso. The New Kadampa
Tradition "offers standard Gelugpa teachings based on Kelsang Gyatso's books,
which present a systematic path to enlightenment." Historical background of the
formation of NKT. In 1976 the students of Lama Thubten Yeshe founded the
Manjushri Institute, a registered charitable company with Lama Yeshe as the
Spiritual Director and purchased the assets of Conishead Priory, a sadly
neglected Victorian mansion in Ulverston (Cumbria), England for the price of
£70,000. In the same year Lama Thubten Yeshe and Lama Zopa Rinpoche visited
Kelsang Gyatso in India and invited him over to teach at the Manjushri
Institute, which was a part of their FPMT network. Kelsang Gyatso, a Tibetan
Buddhist teacher, monk and scholar from the Gelug Tradition, is a contemporary
of Lama Yeshe's from the time they spent studying at Sera Monastery. According
to researcher David N. Kay, Kelsang Gyatso was invited in 1976 by Lama Thubten
Yeshe and Lama Zopa Rinpoche, who sought the advice of HH the 14th Dalai Lama
when choosing Kelsang Gyatso. Whereas according to a NKT brochure, "Lama Yeshe
requested Kyabje Trijang Rinpoche to ask Kelsang Gyatso to become Resident
Teacher of Manjushri Institute. Kelsang Gyatso later recounted that Kyabje
Trijang Rinpoche asked him to go to England, teach Shantideva's "Guide to the
Bodhisattva's Way of Life", Chandrakirti's "Guide to the Middle Way" and
Lamrim, and then check whether there was any meaning in his continuing to
stay." Kelsang Gyatso was requested by Lama Yeshe to lead the "General Program"
of Buddhist study. In 1979 Lama Yeshe installed another Geshe at Manjushri
Institute, Geshe Jampa Tekchok, to teach a parallel twelve-year Geshe Studies
Programme, which was recognized and validated by the Dalai Lama and which was
modeled on the traditional Geshe degree. From 1982 to 1990 this program was led
by Geshe Konchog Tsewang. According to a disciple of Lama Yeshe from this time,
Lama Yeshe intended the institute "to become the central monastery of the
FPMT... one of the early jewels of the FPMT crown" and "the pioneer among the
western centers". In the late 1970s, Kelsang Gyatso, without consulting Lama
Yeshe, opened up a Buddhist Centre in York under his own spiritual direction.
Kay sees this as the beginning of a conflict between Lama Yeshe and Kelsang
Gyatso. However, according to Kelsang Gyatso, "the opening of the Centre in
York caused not one moment of confusion or disharmony". Kelsang Gyatso was
asked to resign so that another Geshe, described by Kay as "more devoted to
FPMT objectives", could take over as a resident teacher of Manjushri Institute.
Many students of Kelsang Gyatso petitioned him to stay and teach them, and on
this basis he decided to remain. In the following years prior 1990 Kelsang
Gyatso established 15 centers under his own direction in Great Britain and
Spain. Both David Kay and Daniel Cozort describe the management committee of
Manjushri Institute from 1981 onwards as made up principally of Kelsang
Gyatso's closest students, also known as "the Priory Group". According to Kay,
"The Priory Group became dissatisfied with the FPMT's increasingly centralized
organisation." Cozort states that different disagreements "led to a rift
between Lama Yeshe and his students and Geshe Kelsang Gyatso and his, and
eventually the Manjushri Board of directors (comprised of Geshe Gyatso's
students) severed the connection of the between institute and FPMT." According
to Kay, Lama Yeshe tried at different times to reassert his authority over the
Institute, but his attempts were unsuccessful. Kay goes on to describe an open
conflict of authority which developed between the Priory Group and the FPMT
administration in 1983. In February 1984 the conflict was mediated by the
Office of His Holiness the Dalai Lama in London. Kay states that after the
death of Lama Yeshe in March 1984, the FPMT lost interest because they saw it
as a fruitless case. Since that time, Kay states, the Manjushri Institute has
developed mainly under the guidance of Kelsang Gyatso without further reference
to the FPMT, but legally remained part of the FPMT until late 1990. According
to Kay, of the two Geshes at Manjushri Institute, it was Kelsang Jyatso who had
always taken the greater interest in the running and direction of the
Institute, and most of the students there were closer to him. The courses
offered by both Geshes complemented each other, but as Kay remarked, they
"differed in one important respect: only Geshe Kelsang's General Programme
included courses on Tantric Buddhism, and attendance upon these required the
reception of a Tantric empowerment." Further, Kay argues that "Lama Yeshe's and
Geshe Kelsang's different ideological perspectives provided the conditions for
the organisational dispute between the Institute and the FPMT to escalate.
Kelsang Gyatso was already predisposed to support his students in their
struggle with the FPMT administration because the organisation was inspired by
a vision that he did not totally agree with." Kay writes that, "the
determination of Geshe Kelsang and the Priory Group to separate from the parent
organisation was uncompromising, and this was a position that only hardened
during the following years." He goes on to describe the split from the Gelug
school and FPMT as follows: Kelsang Gyatso made a 3-year retreat from 1987-1990
in Dumfries, Scotland and asked Geshe Losang Pende from Ganden Shartse
monastery to lead the General Program in his absence, whilst Geshe Konchog
Tsewang continued to teach the Geshe Studies Programme at Conishead Priory
(Manjushri Institute). Different Lamas, including Lama Zopa Rinpoche, were
still invited. Especially the visit of Lama Zopa Rinpoche in 1988 "is
significant, indicating the ongoing devotion of the students to this lama and
their desire to leave the negativity of the schism with the FPMT in the past."
In 1988 and 1990 the uncle of Kelsang Gyatso, Choyang Duldzin Kuten Lama - the
oracle of Dorje Shugden - also visited Manjushri Institute. Before that time
Song Rinpoche, Geshe Lhundup Sopa, Geshe Rabten, as well as other lamas such as
Ajahn Sumedho and Thich Nhat Hanh have taught at Manjushri Institute. During
Kelsang Gyatso's period of retreat he wrote some of his books and worked out
the foundations of the NKT. Kay states: "The first major development that took
place during Geshe Kelsang's retreat was the introduction of the 'Teacher
Training Programme' (TTP) at the Manjushri Institute." Kay comments the
developments at that time: "By giving his study programmes a textual basis,
Geshe Kelsang not only provided accessible materials to enhance the focus and
commitment of his students, but also laid down structures through which
spiritual authority could later be concentrated exclusively on him." According
to Kay, According to Kay, Kelsang Gyatso was gravely concerned that the purity
of Tsongkhapa's tradition was being undermined by the lingering inclusivism of
his Western students, something he had been outspoken for some years, "but he
now acted more forcefully in his opposition to it by discouraging his students
both from receiving guidance from teachers of other traditions and from reading
their books." Kay states that another result of these "radically exclusive
policies" was that after the foundation of NKT the Manjushri Institute Library,
with over 3000 books, was removed. Kay goes on to state that, "this began with
non-Gelug books being removed, but as Geshe Kelsang's vision crystallised, even
books by Gelug teachers became unacceptable to him and the library disappeared
altogether. He thus became convinced that the Tibetan Gelug tradition as a
whole no longer embodied Tsongkhapa's pure teachings and that he and his
disciples must therefore separate from it. From this point onwards, Tibetan
Gelug lamas would no longer be invited to teach within his network. This
perceived degeneration extended to include its highest-level lamas, and so even
veneration for the Dalai Lama was now actively discouraged." The pictures of
the Dalai Lama were removed from the gompas and shrines of Kelsang Gyatso's
centres. In 1990 Kelsang Gyatso became also outspoken against the Geshe Studies
Programme, and "made the pursuit of his new programmes compulsory." According
to Kay "As it was no longer possible for students to follow the programmes of
both Geshes, the basis of Geshe Konchog's teaching programme at the Institute
was undermined, and in 1991 he retired to Gyuto Monastery in Assam, India." The
foundation of the New Kadampa Tradition. According to David Kay, "in 1991,
through the successful exploitation of a legal loophole, the assets of
Manjushri Institut finally fell under the sole control of the Priory Group"
(the close disciples of Kelsang Gyatso). In the Spring of that same year,
Kelsang Gyatso announced the creation of the 'New Kadampa Tradition', an event
which was celebrated in the NKT-Magazine "Full Moon" as "a wonderful
development in the history of the Buddhadharma." In 1992, the Manjushri
Institute developed a new constitution, which constituted the formal foundation
of the NKT. The Manjushri Institute was renamed the Manjushri Mahayana Buddhist
Center, and later the Manjushri Kadampa Meditation Center. Since then, it has
remained Kelsang Gyatso's home and the NKT's flagship center. With the
foundation of the New Kadampa Tradition (NKT) by Kelsang Gyatso, he established
a new and independent religious movement aiming to "principally follow the
teachings and example of Je Tsongkhapa". This also gave a new identity to his
followers. The many NKT centres which were built up rapidly by his followers
could gather under the common auspices of the NKT and their spiritual guide,
distinguishing and disassociating themselves from other Tibetan Buddhist
traditions, especially the Gelug school from which Kelsang Gyatso originated.
Kay argued that with these changes, Kelsang Gyatso provided a basis for the NKT
to become a Western tradition whose "spiritual authority could later be
concentrated exclusively on him." Cozort describes this as unusual in the
Tibetan tradition. The NKT described themselves as being "an entirely
independent Buddhist tradition with no political affiliations ... that is
appropriate to the needs and conditions of the modern world". The identity of
the NKT. The views of NKT about NKT. Followers of the NKT refer to themselves
as Kadampa Buddhists, the Temples of the New Kadampa Tradition are referred to
as Kadampa Buddhist Temples, and more recently NKT teachers are named Kadampa
Teachers. Additionally, the Dharma centers of the New Kadampa Tradition are
called Kadampa Buddhist Centers. James Belither, the former secretary of the
NKT, described the NKT as "a Mahayana Buddhist tradition with historical
connections with Tibet", rather than a Tibetan tradition, and explained that
Kelsang Gyatso wishes his followers always "to present Dharma in a way
appropriate to their own culture and society without the need to adopt Tibetan
culture and customs". The views of others about NKT. Whereas the NKT celebrate
Kelsang Gyatso as the one who "is primarily responsible for the worldwide
revival of Kadampa Buddhism in our time", "critics have described The New
Kadampa Tradition as a breakaway sect or cult and argue it is not part of the
ancient Kadampa Tradition but a split from the Gelug school of Tibetan
Buddhism." "(for more see Controversies)" Bluck remarked that there remains an
apparent contradiction between claiming a pure Tibetan lineage and separating
completely from contemporary Tibetan tradition. While the NKT strongly
emphasizes its unbroken 'lineage', it has no Tibetan followers and claims to
stand outside current Tibetan Buddhism. Spiritual activities. Teachings and
books. Bluck lists the specific traditional teachings that are seen as
important in the NKT-IKBU: "the nature of the mind, karma and reincarnation,
the preciousness of human life, the role of meditation, death, and the
commitments of going for refuge", as well as "understanding the Four Noble
Truths, developing renunciation, and the training of moral discipline,
concentration and wisdom", followed by "becoming a compassionate bodhisattva
(by developing bodhicitta and the six perfections), understanding the ultimate
truth of emptiness and finally attaining Buddhahood." The NKT-IKBU's teachings
are based exclusively on the teachings and published works of Kelsang Gyatso,
which in turn are commentaries on Gelug works, especially those of its founder
Je Tsongkhapa's texts. According to Helen Waterhouse, Kelsang Gyatso follows
the Tibetan Buddhist custom of studying texts through the teacher's
commentaries. With respect to the contents of the teachings she states that
"NKT doctrine is not different from that of mainline Gelugpa", with a
Prasangika Madhyamaka philosophical orientation, and emphasizing the teachings
on dependent arising and emptiness. The main practice in the NKT-IKBU is Lamrim
(the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment), Lojong (Training the Mind), and
Vajrayana Mahamudra (the practices of Highest Yoga Tantra). The books studied
in the NKT are published by the Buddhist publishing house Tharpa Publications.
Study programs. NKT-IKBU offers three study programs: "the open and
introductory General Programme, the Foundation Programme for more committed
practitioners, and the demanding Teacher Training Programme." The study
programs of the NKT-IKBU are what distinguishes it from all other Buddhist
traditions. Giving an overview of the purpose of the programs, the NKT-IKBU
says: "Venerable Geshe Kelsang Gyatso has designed three special Study Programs
for the systematic study and practice of Kadampa Buddhism that are especially
suited to the modern world." It is believed by NKT-IKBU followers that the
teachings transmit the pure lineage of Je Tsongkhapa in its entirety. Religious
practices. NKT-IKBU meditation practices include traditional Lamrim subjects
such as "precious human life, death and rebirth, karma and samsara, taking
refuge, the development of equanimity, kindness and compassion towards all
beings, bodhicitta, understanding emptiness, and relying on a spiritual guide."
While the Je Tsongkhapa and Dorje Shugden practices are recited daily, NKT-IKBU
practitioners also regularly perform a number of other ritual practices,
including Avalokiteshvara, Heruka, Vajrayogini, Tara, Manjushri, Amitayus and
the Medicine Buddha. Bluck notes that "All these sādhanas have either been
'compiled from traditional sources' by Geshe Kelsang or translated under his
supervision." Religious observances. Annual holidays common to other Buddhist
traditions: In 2004, the dates of lunar month observances were changed to the
respective days in the common calendar. NKT Day commemorates the founding of
the NKT-IKBU, while International Temples Day is an opportunity to reflect on
the importance of building Kadampa Buddhist Temples throughout the world.
International Buddhist festivals. Three annual Buddhist NKT Festivals are held
each year: (1) The Spring Festival – held at Manjushri KMC in UK; (2) The
Summer Festival – held at Manjushri KMC in UK; (3) The Fall Festival – held
at various locations outside the UK. These are taught by the General Spiritual
Director of the New Kadampa Tradition, currently Gen-la Kelsang Dekyong, and
include teachings and empowerments from the Spiritual Director, reviews and
meditations led by senior NKT Teachers, chanted meditations and offering
ceremonies, and meditation retreats. They are attended by between 2000 and 6000
people from around the world. Ordination. Within the NKT-IKBU community there
are over 700 monks and nuns. Ordination ceremonies are usually held twice a
year in the main NKT Temple at Manjushri Kadampa Meditation Center in Cumbria
(UK), Ulverston. To ordain, one must ask Kelsang Gyatso's permission, and also
the permission of his or her parents. Buddha established both lay and ordained
Pratimoksha vows, and established several levels of ordination vows.
Traditionally, the different levels of ordination are distinguished by the
specific number of vows taken, and by the ceremony in which they were received.
In the NKT-IKBU, Kelsang Gyatso established a simplified tradition of
ordination with ten vows that summarize the entire Vinaya, and a single
ordination ceremony. The ordination tradition of the NKT-IKBU differs from that
of other Buddhist groups in that it is based on the Mahayana "Perfection of
Wisdom Sutras" instead of the Hinayana "Vinaya Sutras". According to Kelsang
Gyatso, "The Perfection of Wisdom Sutras are our Vinaya and Lamrim is its
commentary." Robert Bluck observed that in the NKT-IKBU a "Vinaya Sutras"-based
"full ordination is not available, and those who do ordain remain as novices,
though again this is common in Tibet." Instead, the NKT-IKBU emphasizes
renunciation as a spiritual transformation over time. Kelsang Gyatso explains
that when a person is first ordained they receive a Rabjung (preliminary)
ordination; when their renunciation improves and deepens, their ordination
naturally transforms into a Getsul (sramanera) ordination; and when their
renunciation becomes "a spontaneous wish to attain nirvana", their ordination
naturally transforms into a Gelong (bhikkhu) ordination. For this reason,
Kelsang Gyatso does not require a separate ritual ordination ceremony. Monks
and nuns in the NKT-IKBU abandon the physical signs of a lay person by shaving
their head and wearing the maroon and yellow robes of an ordained person. They
are given a new name which starts with "Kelsang", since it is traditional for
ordinees to receive part of the ordaining master's name (in this case, Kelsang
Gyatso). They also engage in a Sojong ceremony twice a month to purify and
restore their vows. Monastics who break their ordination vows must leave their
Centre for a year, with the exception of attending various bigger courses,
Celebrations and Festivals. After that year, "with some conditions" they can
return but cannot teach or participate in the Teacher Training Program.
Practitioners who wish to ordain approach their Buddhist teacher when they feel
ready, and request formal permission once they have their teacher's consent.
They may decide to live in one of the NKT-IKBU's many Buddhist centers, but
this is not a requirement. They are, in general, not financially provided for
by the NKT-IKBU. And, if they live in an NKT-IKBU Dharma center, they still
have to pay rent for their accommodation and pay for meals and the spiritual
programs. To finance this, some have part-time or full-time work. According to
Belither, "a few people are sponsored because of their NKT work but others are
on 'extended working visits' or work locally, and some are legitimately on
employment benefit." When working, they may "wear ordinary clothes if this is
more convenient." Teachers. Kelsang Gyatso. After leaving Tibet in 1959,
Kelsang Gyatso taught and engaged in retreat in India for 18 years. Trijang
Rinpoche, the root Guru of Kelsang Gyatso, asked him to be the resident teacher
at Manjushri Institute (now known as Manjushri Kadampa Meditation Centre) in
England. Kelsang Gyatso taught the General Program at Manjushri from 1976 to
1987. In 1987, Kelsang Gyatso entered a 3-year retreat at Tharpaland in
Dumfries, Scotland. During his retreat, he wrote five books and established the
foundations of the NKT-IKBU. Since that time, the NKT-IKBU has grown to
comprise over 1,100 Centres and groups throughout 40 countries. After
completing his retreat in the spring of 1991, Kelsang Gyatso announced the
creation of the NKT-IKBU, an event which was celebrated by his students in the
NKT-IKBU magazine "Full Moon" as "a wonderful development in the history of the
Buddhadharma." In 1992, the NKT-IKBU was legally incorporated under English
law, which constituted the formal foundation of the NKT-IKBU. The many Dharma
Centres that were following Kelsang Gyatso's spiritual direction were gathered
under the common auspices of the NKT-IKBU, with him as their General Spiritual
Director (GSD). He remained GSD until August 2009 when he retired and was
replaced by his successor, Gen-la Kelsang Khyenrab. Each of the individual
Centers is legally and financially independent. Successor to Kelsang Gyatso.
From 1991 to 1995 Gelong Thubten Gyatso was designated as Kelsang Gyatso's
future successor. He disrobed in 1995, and Kelsang Gyatso provisionally
appointed 4 'Gen-las', i.e. Losang Kelsang, Kelsang Jangsem, Kelsang Dekyong
and Samden Gyatso. After about a year, the former two resigned as Gen-las and
were re-appointed as Resident Teachers. Samden Gyatso became the Deputy
Spiritual Director and successor to Kelsang Gyatso while Kelsang Dekyong was
appointed as the US National Spiritual Director. From this time onwards, the
Deputy Spiritual Director also held the appointment of Resident Teacher at
Manjushri Kadampa Meditation Centre. In February 2007 Samden Gyatso resigned as
Deputy Spiritual Director. Kelsang Khyenrab was appointed as Deputy Spiritual
Director and became the General Spiritual Director when Kelsang Gyatso retired
in Summer 2009. In 2008, Gen-la Khyenrab became Acting General Spiritual
Director, under Kelsang Gyatso's supervision, and assumed the post of General
Spiritual Director in August 2009 for a four-year term. Gen-la Dekyong, the
National Spiritual Director of the United States of America, has in turn
assumed the post of Deputy Spiritual Director, while retaining her post as US
National Spiritual Director in accordance with the "Internal Rules". Gen-la
Khyenrab retired as the General Spiritual Director due to ill health in April
2010 and, in accordance with the "Internal Rules", Gen-la Dekyong was appointed
as General Spiritual Director. Her position as Deputy Spiritual Director was
taken by Gen-la Kunsang. Other teachers. Alongside Kelsang Gyatso, who as
founder and former spiritual director was the main teacher of the NKT-IKBU and
his successors, all teachings (i.e. the three study programs) are held by
Western students; lay persons and ordained alike. Qualification as an NKT-IKBU
Dharma teacher is generally achieved by attending the NKT-IKBU's own Teacher
Training Program, which Kelsang Gyatso regards as "a western equivalent to the
traditional Tibetan Geshe degree." Regarding the qualifications of NKT-IKBU
teachers, Kay observed that "Whilst personal experience of the teachings is
considered important, the dominant view within the NKT is that the main
qualification of a teacher is their purity of faith and discipleship."
According to Robert Bluck, "Most teachers are appointed to centres by Kelsang
Gyatso before they have completed the Teaching Training Programme and continue
studying by correspondence, with an intensive study programme at Manjushri each
summer." Daniel Cozort explained that this is "rather like graduate students
who teach undergraduate courses while pursuing their own Ph.D.'s." In addition
to the TTP commitment, all Resident Teachers have to attend International
Teacher Training Program each year, taught in repeated rotation according to a
sixteen-year study scheme. Ordained and lay Resident Teachers who have taught
successfully for four years are given the titles 'Gen' and 'Kadam',
respectively. Organisation and development. Internal Rules. The legal document
"A Moral Discipline Guide: The Internal Rules of The New Kadampa Tradition –
International Kadampa Buddhist Union" explains that the NKT-IKBU Growth. The
NKT-IKBU currently lists more than 200 centres and around 900 branch classes/
study groups in 40 countries, with an estimated 8,000 members. The centres are
independent charitable corporations, and the groups are branches off an
established center which meet weekly in places such as churches and community
centres. In comparison, Waterhouse says the NKT-IKBU "is very good at marketing
its product", with Centers and branches producing leaflets that advertise local
NKT-IKBU groups in their respective towns, a level of publicity that according
to Jones is comparatively more "forceful and extroverted" with regard to other
Buddhist groups, and has helped the NKT-IKBU to achieve "a phenomenal increase
in membership and centres." Another attraction is the high level of activity at
an NKT-IKBU Dharma center, where it is often possible to be taking part at the
center every day of the week, in contrast to other groups "which meet on a
weekly basis but provide little other support or activity." Bluck attributes
NKT-IKBU's rapid growth to "a wish to share the Dharma rather than
‘conversion and empire-building’." Kay says that the NKT-IKBU is sensitive
to criticism on the subject of expansion and cites Kelsang Gyatso's response to
any criticisms about its outreach efforts, stating that "every organization
'tries to attract more people with appropriate publicity.'" New Dharma centers
are expected to be self-supporting, as neither Kelsang Gyatso nor the NKT-IKBU
owns the centers. Kadampa Meditation Centers. A Kadampa Meditation Centre (KMC)
is a Kadampa Dharma Center that serves the local, national, and international
communities. A KMC is generally more centrally organized than regular Kadampa
Buddhist Centers. Besides having a program of courses for the local community,
KMCs host major gatherings such as Dharma Celebrations, National Festivals, and
International Festivals. They are also home to the International Kadampa
Temples. KMCs are non-profit organizations and all their annual profits are
donated to the International Temples Project. There are currently 18 KMCs
around the world, with several in the US. Temples for World Peace, World Peace
Cafés, and Hotel Kadampas. "World Peace Cafés" have opened at some NKT
Centers, starting in Ulverston, UK and now in other countries e.g. Atlanta,
Georgia. In 2005 the NKT-IKBU opened their first "World Peace Hotel", called
"Hotel Kadampa": a no-smoking, alcohol-free hotel in Southern Spain. (A second
Hotel Kadampa opened in Montecatini in Tuscany, Italy, but has since closed).
The hotel "functions as a normal hotel but with the benefit of a shrine room
and meditation teaching. The absence of alcohol and loud entertainment attracts
those who appreciated a quiet and peaceful atmosphere." International Retreat
Centers. International Retreat Centers (IRCs) are centers that offer facilities
for those wishing to do both long-term and short-term meditation retreats.
Tharpaland International Retreat Centre was founded by Kelsang Gyatso in 1985,
when he began a three-year retreat there, and has since hosted thousands of
people. Kailash International Retreat Center was founded in Switzerland in
2007. Separation from contemporary Tibetan Buddhism. New Kadampa Tradition and
Gelugpa Tradition. According to the NKT-IKBU, it is Tibetan in its antecedents
and follows the teachings of the historic, "Old" Kadampa and the "New Kadam"
Tradition of Je Tsongkhapa, the latter of which became the Gelug school of
Tibetan Buddhism. Critics on the other hand characterize the NKT-IKBU as "a
breakaway movement and argue that the New Kadampa Tradition, as it is known
today, is not part of the ancient Kadampa Tradition but a split from the Gelug
school." The closing prayers of all NKT-IKBU spiritual practices include two
dedication prayers for the flourishing of the 'Virtuous Tradition' (i.e., the
Gelugpas), these being "recited every day after teachings and pujas at all
Gelugpa monasteries and Dharma Centres." Of the words, "New Kadampa Tradition",
James Belither (NKT Secretary for 20 years) states that the "word 'New' is used
not to imply that it is newly created, but that it is a fresh presentation of
Buddhadharma in a form and manner that is appropriate to the needs and
conditions of the modern world." Kadampa Buddhism and Tibetan Buddhism.
According to Waterhouse, Kelsang Gyatso "has broken away from the school's
representatives in India and Tibet." Cozort confirms that the NKT-IKBU "is not
subordinate to Tibetan authorities other than Geshe Gyatso himself." James
Belither explained that the NKT-IKBU "does not accept the Dalai Lama's
authority 'simply because there is no political or ecclesiastical reason for
doing so.'" Instead of presenting itself as a Tibetan tradition, James Belither
has said that the NKT-IKBU is "a Mahayana Buddhist tradition with historical
connections with Tibet", saying it wishes "to present Dharma in a way
appropriate to their own culture and society without the need to adopt Tibetan
culture and customs." Bluck sees an "an apparent contradiction between claiming
a pure Tibetan lineage and complete separation from contemporary Tibetan
religion, culture and politics." The NKT-IKBU disagrees that there is a
contradiction, saying "It is possible to be a follower of Je Tsongkhapa's
lineage but not a Tibetan Buddhist, just as a child of Russian immigrants to
America may consider themselves American but not Russian." Dorje Shugden
controversy. Alongside the Guru yoga of Je Tsongkhapa, one of the NKT-IKBU's
two "essential practices" is of the Dharma Protector Dorje Shugden, as taught
by Kelsang Gyatso's and the Dalai Lama's root Guru, Trijang Rinpoche. For NKT-
IKBU practitioners, "Shugden is, like Tsongkhapa, an emanation of Manjushri,
and equal in status." It is no wonder, then, that controversy arose due to the
Dalai Lama's "suppression" of the Dorje Shugden practice within the Tibetan
exile community. Acting from of a sense of "spiritual solidarity" for Dorje
Shugden practitioners in India, hundreds of members of the NKT-IKBU joined in
the Western Shugden Society in publicly demonstrating against the Dalai Lama's
"explicit ban" which resulted in Kelsang Gyatso's expulsion from his alma
mater, Sera Je monastery. Kelsang Gyatso considered the "political" ban to be
"unwarranted meddling in a legitimate spiritual practice," with many of his
students regarding the Dalai Lama's "accusations against Dorje Shugden practice
absurd" and continuing with it unabated. In the British press, the NKT-IKBU was
widely criticized for engaging in the controversy and picketing the Dalai Lama.
