Ole Nydahl Ole Nydahl (born March 19, 1941) is a Danish Lama in the Karma Kagyu
school of Tibetan Buddhism. Since the early 1970s, Nydahl has toured the world
giving lectures and meditation courses. With his wife, Hannah Nydahl, he
founded Diamond Way Buddhism, a worldwide Karma Kagyu Buddhist organization of
lay practitioners. Nydahl is the author of nine books in English, including
"The Way Things Are", "Entering the Diamond Way", and "Riding the Tiger". Early
life and education. Ole Nydahl was born in Copenhagen and grew up in Denmark.
In the early 1960s, he served briefly in the Danish Army, then studied
philosophy, English, and German at the University of Copenhagen, where he
completed the examen philosophicum with the best possible grade. He began but
did not finish a doctoral thesis on Aldous Huxley’s "Doors of Perception". As
a young man, Nydahl was involved in boxing, race car driving and also travelled
overland from Denmark to Nepal several times. As described in his book
"Entering the Diamond Way", his travels were financed through smuggling, for
which he was once arrested and detained in Denmark. Involvement with Buddhism.
Buddhist education. In 1968, Nydahl and his wife Hannah travelled to Nepal on
their honeymoon. Ole and Hannah Nydahl's first Buddhist teacher was the Drukpa
Kagyu master Lopon Tsechu Rinpoche. In December 1969, the Nydahls met Rangjung
Rigpe Dorje, the 16th Karmapa. They were among the first Western students of
the Karmapa and grew close to him. The Nydahls also became students of Mipham
Chokyi Lodro, the fourteenth Shamarpa. From the Karmapa, the Nydahls learned
about Vajrayana Buddhism and mahamudra. From the Shamarpa, they took the
Bodhisattva vows and learned about Gampopa's "Jewel Ornament of Liberation".
They have received teachings and empowerments from various Tibetan lamas,
including the Dalai Lama. In 1972, Ole Nydahl was appointed a Buddhist teacher
by the Karmapa and was sent back to Europe in order to promote Buddhism in the
West. In 1983, the Shamarpa named Nydahl a Buddhist master. In 1995, Khenpo
Chödrak Thenpel Rinpoche named Nydahl a lama on behalf of the Buddhist
Institutes of the Gyalwa Karmapa. Nydahl has been criticised for never going on
a three-year retreat, which is a prerequisite for use of the title 'lama' in
some traditions of Buddhism. However, the use of the word Lama as a term of
address (vs. as a title) is a more individual matter, like the term of address
'Rinpoche'. Many of the early Buddhist teachers in the Karma Kagyu tradition
used the word 'Lama' as a term of address, including Marpa and Milarepa, in
their songs to their teachers, who had not gone on three year retreats. The
Sixteenth Karmapa also stated that, "if someone has a greater wisdom and
capacity for penetrating the teaching, then even without doing a three-year
retreat, it is possible for one to experience definite understanding and
realization." Nydahl was expressly confirmed as a lama by the Shamarpa in 2006.
Teaching. Upon returning to Europe, Hannah and Ole Nydahl began to teach
Buddhism and organize meditation centers, first in their native Denmark, then
in Germany and other countries. The centers belong to the Karma Kagyu lineage
and operate under Ole Nydahl's practical guidance. In the early 90s, Diamond
Way Buddhism was founded as a way to protect established centers during the
Karmapa controversy. , there were 629 Diamond Way centers throughout the world.
Most are in Europe, Russia, or the United States. Ole Nydahl regularly travels
between them during the year giving lectures and meditation courses. His
courses cover topics such as mahamudra and phowa. He has traveled almost
constantly for the last 40 years, teaching in a new city nearly every day. His
teaching activity was described and commended by the Shamarpa in 2012. Together
with his students, Nydahl has created Buddhist centers that provide access to
Vajrayana meditation methods without requiring an understanding of Tibetan
language or culture. In the Diamond Way centers, the meditations and names of
the various Buddha forms have been translated into Western languages. Ole
Nydahl believes it essential for people to understand and read the meditations
in their own language in order for Buddhism to become truly rooted in the West.
Diamond Way centers are run entirely by volunteers; the organization does not
maintain any paid staff. The organizational structure is intended to be
democratic and to function on the basis of idealism and friendship. According
to Buddhism Today, the Diamond Way Buddhist magazine, "hierarchical systems
will not sell with independent people in the West. Nobody wants a distant
teacher on a pedestal or a big organization standing on their shoulders and
telling them what to think." Students in Diamond Way Centers practice the
ngöndro given by Wangchuk Dorje, 9th Karmapa Lama, which are a set of four
foundational practices that are intended to prepare the mind for enlightenment,
a meditation on the Buddha Loving Eyes (Avalokiteśvara in Sanskrit, Chenrezig
in Tibetan) and several forms of guru yoga or meditation on the lama (as given
by the 16th Karmapa). In a newsletter dated July 9, 2010, Nydahl responded to
questions about the types of practices taught in Diamond Way Centers by stating
"I never taught anything I was not asked to pass on by the great Sixteenth
Karmapa and that its basis was always the Guru Yogas of the Karmapas. Nothing
else is practiced in our now 650 Diamond Way centers world-wide where my
students meditate side by side." Jørn Borup, a professor of religion at Aarhus
University, says that Ole Nydahl is "the most lasting influence on the Buddhist
practice scene in Denmark" and "has in many ways been the icon of living
Buddhism in Denmark". The total number of Nydahl's adherents is unknown, but
can be estimated conservatively to include 15,000 to 70,000 students and casual
sympathizers world wide. In Germany alone, the German Buddhist Union, (Deutsche
Buddhistische Union) estimates that about 20,000 persons regularly visit the
Diamond Way centers and groups. Role in the Karmapa controversy. When a great
Tibetan lama dies, it is tradition in Tibetan Buddhism to find the next
reincarnation to continue the work. When the Sixteenth Karmapa died in 1981,
two potential successors were found, Trinley Thaye Dorje and Ogyen Trinley
Dorje, causing a major split in the Karma Kagyu. Nydahl, along with the
Fourteenth Shamarpa, who was one of only four lineage-holders appointed to
recognize the incarnation of the Karmapa at that time, supported Trinley Thaye
Dorje. It was largely because of the work of Hannah and Ole Nydahl that most
European Karma Kagyu centers chose to support Trinley Thaye Dorje. As a result,
629 of the centers supporting Trinley Thaye Dorje are affiliated with Diamond
Way Buddhism. The other candidate, Ogyen Trinley Dorje, was recognized by
Tenzin Gyatso, 14th Dalai Lama. The Dalai Lama confirmed Ogyen Trinley Dorje as
the Karmapa after he had been requested to do so by two of the other lineage-
holders, Tai Situ Rinpoche and Gyaltsap Rinpoche, but the supporters of Trinley
Thaye Dorje say that the Dalai Lama is not entitled to do so, and has never
done so before. The argument that Ogyen Trinley Dorje is the Karmapa is based
in part on a letter presented by Pema Tönyö Nyinje, 12th Tai Situpa. The
supporters of Ogyen Trinley claim it was written by the Sixteenth Karmapa in
order to predict the identity of his future rebirth. Nydahl, the Shamarpa, and
Topgala requested that the letter's authenticity be tested. They believe that
the letter was written not by the Sixteenth Karmapa but by the Situpa himself.
They have requested that the letter be verified by independent experts
including forensic document examiners. Tai Situ has thus far refused to allow
this claiming it would be a violation of a sacred object. Due to his role in
the Karmapa controversy, Nydahl has been heavily criticized by the supporters
of Ogyen Trinley Dorje, such as the authors Mick Brown and Lea Terhune, a
student of Tai Situpa. In connection to this, some blame Nydahl for causing the
1992 split of the Karma Kagyu, although there is no evidence of this, and
accuse him of breaking the samayas to his teachers, which is deprecated in
Vajrayana. Dispute with German Buddhist Union. There is a greater concentration
of Diamond Way centers in Germany compared to elsewhere in Europe. Between late
1999 and April 2000 there was a public dispute between the German Buddhist
Union and the German branch of Diamond Way, which is a member organisation of
the Union. Due to of Nydahl's attitude towards Islam, his political statements,
his manner of expressing and presenting himself, and his relationships with
women, there were calls for the expulsion of Nydahl's organisation from the
Union. The dispute was resolved at a meeting between the two organizations on 4
October 2000; although differences were clear, they agreed to learn from the
past and cooperate in the future. The conversation was described as "a first
step" that "should eliminate misunderstandings, and lead to clarity and
cooperation." The German branch of Diamond Way "(Buddhistischer Dachverband
Diamantweg)" remains a member of the German Buddhist Union. Academic reception.
Burkhard Scherer, a pupil of both Nydahl and Thaye Dorje, takes a historical-
critical approach of Tibetan Buddhist Studies. He writes that: He regrets that
Nydahl continues to be ignored by Tibet scholars and argues that prevailing
negative criticism from a position of suspicion by sociologists and students of
New Religious Movements should be counterbalanced by positive criticism from a
position of trust by Tibet scholars. Martin Baumann, a professor of religion at
the University of Lucerne, remarked in a newspaper interview "when I listen to
his [Nydahl's] alarmingly superficial formulations in his talks I can
understand his critics who say that he is presenting a watered-down 'instant
Buddhism', a sort of 'Buddhism light' for the West." Political views. Nydahl
says that he does not make political comments in his capacity as a lama, but as
a "responsible, thinking human being", and that no one can make such statements
from a Buddhist perspective because Buddha Shakyamuni did not comment on
religious ideas founded centuries after his death. He also distinguishes the
"mainstream Muslims" that he disapproves of from Sufis and Bahá'ís. An online
interview with Nydahl also featured the following statement: "Judaism and
Christianity are fine. Islam, I warn against. I know the Koran, I know the life
story of Mohammad and I think we cannot use that in our society today."
Personal life. Nydahl is not a monk and so has not taken vows of celibacy.
Jørn Borup, Associate Professor of Religion at Aarhus University, notes that
Nydahl "certainly isn't afraid to say that he likes the ladies, primarily his
wife, who is now deceased, but also other women. This brings him into conflict
with not just Islam but also, sometimes, with old-fashioned Buddhism..." Yet
several well-known Vajrayana Buddhist lamas were married: Marpa the translator
is said to have had nine wives; others had romantic relationships, including
the 6th Dalai Lama, and the teacher who brought Buddhism to Tibet,
Padmasambhava, who had five Tantric consorts who were also his students. When
asked about it, Nydahl has said: "There’s no teacher-student relationship
involved in that, [...] They’re Diamond Way Buddhists, but they’re not my
students in that moment. They’re equal partners." Bibliography. Ole Nydahl
has written several books in English, German and Danish, which have been
translated into several other European languages.
