Opus Dei Opus Dei, formally known as The Prelature of the Holy Cross and Opus
Dei (), is an institution of the Catholic Church that teaches that everyone is
called to holiness and that ordinary life is a path to sanctity. The majority
of its membership are lay people, with secular priests under the governance of
a prelate (bishop) elected by specific members and appointed by the Pope. Opus
Dei is Latin for "Work of God"; hence the organization is often referred to by
members and supporters as "the Work". Founded in Spain in 1928 by the Catholic
priest St. Josemaría Escrivá, Opus Dei was given final Catholic Church
approval in 1950 by Pope Pius XII. In 1982, by decision of Pope John Paul II,
the Catholic Church made it into a personal prelature—that is, the
jurisdiction of its own bishop covers the persons in Opus Dei wherever they
are, rather than geographical dioceses. As of 2010, members of the Prelature
numbered 90,260. Lay persons, men and women, numbered 88,245, while there were
2015 priests. These figures do not include the diocesan priest members of Opus
Dei's Priestly Society of the Holy Cross, estimated to number 2000 in the year
2005. Members are in more than 90 countries. About 70% of Opus Dei members live
in their private homes, leading traditional Catholic family lives with secular
careers, while the other 30% are celibate, of whom the majority live in Opus
Dei centres. Opus Dei organizes training in Catholic spirituality applied to
daily life. Aside from personal charity and social work, Opus Dei members are
involved in running universities, university residences, schools, publishing
houses, and technical and agricultural training centers. Opus Dei has been
described as the most controversial force within the Catholic Church. According
to several journalists who researched Opus Dei separately, many criticisms
against Opus Dei are based on fabrications by opponents, and Opus Dei is
considered a sign of contradiction. Several popes and other Catholic leaders
have endorsed what they see as its innovative teaching on the sanctifying value
of work, and its fidelity to Catholic beliefs. In 2002, Pope John Paul II
canonized Escrivá, and called him "the saint of ordinary life." Criticism of
Opus Dei has centered on allegations of secretiveness, controversial recruiting
methods, strict rules governing members, elitism and misogyny, and support of
or participation in authoritarian or right-wing governments, especially the
Francoist Government of Spain until 1978. The mortification of the flesh
practiced by some of its members is also criticized. Within the Catholic
Church, Opus Dei is also criticized for allegedly seeking independence and more
influence. In recent years, Opus Dei has received international attention due
to the novel "The Da Vinci Code" and its film version of 2006, both of which
many prominent Christians and non-believers protested as misleading, inaccurate
and anti-Catholic. History. Foundational period. Opus Dei was founded by a
Catholic priest, Josemaría Escrivá de Balaguer, on 2 October 1928 in Madrid,
Spain. According to Escrivá, on that day he experienced a vision in which he
"saw Opus Dei". He gave the organization the name "Opus Dei", which in Latin
means "Work of God," in order to underscore the belief that the organization
was not his (Escrivá's) work, but was rather God's work. Throughout his life,
Escrivá held that the founding of Opus Dei had a supernatural character.
Escrivá summarized Opus Dei's mission as a way of helping ordinary Christians
"to understand that their life... is a way of holiness and evangelization...
And to those who grasp this ideal of holiness, the Work offers the spiritual
assistance and training they need to put it into practice." Initially, Opus Dei
was open only to men, but in 1930, Escrivá started to admit women, based on
what he believed to be a communication from God. In 1936, the organisation
suffered a temporary setback with the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War, as
many Catholic priests and religious figures, including Escrivá, were forced
into hiding (the Catholic Church actively supported the Nationalist rebels).
The many atrocities committed during the civil war included the murder and rape
of religious figures by anti-Franco Anarchists. After the civil war was won by
General Francisco Franco, Escrivá was able to return to Madrid. Escriva
himself recounted that it was in Spain where Opus Dei found "the greatest
difficulties" because of traditionalists who he felt misunderstood Opus Dei's
ideas. Despite this, Opus Dei flourished during the years of the Franquismo,
spreading first throughout Spain, and after 1945, expanding internationally. In
1939, Escrivá published "The Way", a collection of 999 maxims concerning
spirituality. In the 1940s, Opus Dei found an early critic in the Jesuit
Superior General Wlodimir Ledochowski, who told the Vatican that he considered
Opus Dei "very dangerous for the Church in Spain," citing its "secretive
character" and calling it "a form of Christian Masonry." In 1946, Escrivá
moved the organization's headquarters to Rome. In 1950, Pope Pius XII granted
definitive approval to Opus Dei, thereby allowing married people to join the
organisation. Post-foundational years. In 1975, Escriva died and was succeeded
by Álvaro del Portillo. In 1982, Opus Dei was made into a personal prelature.
This means that Opus Dei is part of the universal Church, and the apostolate of
the members falls under the direct jurisdiction of the Prelate of Opus Dei
wherever they are. As to "what the law lays down for all the ordinary
faithful", the lay members of Opus Dei, being no different from other
Catholics, "continue to be ... under the jurisdiction of the diocesan bishop",
in the words of John Paul II's "Ut Sit". In 1994, Javier Echevarria became
Prelate upon the death of his predecessor. One-third of the world's bishops
sent letters petitioning for the canonization of Escrivá. Escriva was
beatified in 1992 in the midst of controversy prompted by questions about
Escriva's suitability for sainthood. In 2002, approximately 300,000 people
gathered in St. Peter's Square on the day Pope John Paul II canonised
Josemaría Escrivá. According to one author, "Escrivá is... venerated by
millions". There are other members whose process of beatification has been
opened: Ernesto Cofiño, a father of five children and a pioneer in paediatric
research in Guatemala; Montserrat Grases, a teenage Catalan student who died of
cancer; Toni Zweifel, a Swiss engineer; Tomás Alvira and wife, Paquita
Domínguez, a Spanish married couple; Father José Luis Múzquiz de Miguel, and
Bishop Álvaro del Portillo, declared Venerable or with "heroic virtues" by
Pope Benedict XVI on 28 June 2012. During the pontificate of John Paul II, two
members of Opus Dei, Juan Luis Cipriani Thorne and Julián Herranz Casado, were
made cardinals. In September 2005, Pope Benedict XVI blessed a newly installed
statue of Josemaria Escriva placed in an outside wall niche of St Peter's
Basilica, a place for founders of Catholic organisations. During that same
year, Opus Dei received some unwanted attention due to the extraordinary
success of the novel "The Da Vinci Code", in which both Opus Dei and the
Catholic Church itself are depicted negatively. The film version was released
globally in May 2006, further polarising views on the organisation.
Spirituality. Doctrine. Opus Dei is an organisation of the Catholic Church. As
such, it shares the doctrines of the Catholic Church. Opus Dei places special
emphasis on certain aspects of Catholic doctrine. A central feature of Opus
Dei's theology is its focus on the lives of the ordinary Catholics who are
neither priests nor monks. Opus Dei emphasises the "universal call to
holiness": the belief that everyone should aspire to be a saint, as per Jesus'
greatest commandment to "Love God with all your heart" () and "Be perfect as
your heavenly Father is perfect." () Opus Dei also teaches that sanctity is
within the reach of everyone, not just a few special individuals, given Jesus'
teaching that his demands are "easy" and "light," as his divine assistance is
assured. () Opus Dei does not have monks or nuns, and only a minority of its
members are part of the priesthood. Opus Dei emphasizes uniting spiritual life
with professional, social, and family life. Members of Opus Dei lead ordinary
lives, with traditional families and secular careers, and strive to "sanctify
ordinary life". Indeed, Pope John Paul II called Escrivá "the saint of
ordinary life". Similarly, Opus Dei stresses the importance of work and
professional competence. While some religious institutes encourage their
members to withdraw from the material world, Opus Dei exhorts its members and
all lay Catholics to "find God in daily life" and to perform their work
excellently as a service to society and as a fitting offering to God. Opus Dei
teaches that work not only contributes to social progress but is "a path to
holiness",--> and its founder advised people to: "Sanctify your work. Sanctify
yourself in your work. Sanctify others through your work." The biblical roots
of this Catholic doctrine, according to the founder, are in the phrase "God
created man to work" (Gen 2:15) and Jesus's long life as an ordinary carpenter
in a small town. Escrivá, who stressed the Christian's duty to follow Christ's
example, also points to the gospel account that Jesus "has done everything
well" (Mk 7:37). The foundation of the Christian life, stressed Escrivá, is
"divine filiation": Christians are children of God, identified with Christ's
life and mission. Other main features of Opus Dei, according to its official
literature, are: "freedom", respecting choice and taking personal
responsibility; and "charity", love of God above all and love of others. At the
bottom of Escrivá's understanding of the “universal call to holiness” are
two dimensions, subjective and objective, according to Fernando Ocariz, a
Catholic theologian and Vicar General of Opus Dei. The subjective is the call
given to each person to become a saint, regardless of his place in society. The
objective refers to what Escrivá calls Christian materialism: all of creation,
even the most material situation, is a meeting place with God, and leads to
union with Him. Different qualifiers have been used to describe Opus Dei's
doctrine: radical, reactionary, faithful, revolutionary, ultraconservative,
most modern, conservative. and liberal. Prayers. All members – whether
married or unmarried, priests or laypeople – are trained to follow a 'plan of
life', or 'the norms of piety', which are some traditional Catholic devotions.
This is meant to follow the teaching of the Catholic Catechism: "pray at
specific times...to nourish continual prayer," which in turn is based on Jesus'
"pray at all times" (), echoed by St. Paul's "pray without ceasing" ().
According to Escriva, the vocation to Opus Dei is a calling to be a
"contemplative in the middle of the world," who converts work and daily life
into prayer. "Daily norms:" "Weekly norms:" Additionally, members should
participate yearly in a spiritual retreat; a three-week seminar every year is
obligatory for numeraries, and a one-week seminar for supernumeraries. Also
members are expected to make a day-trip pilgrimage where they recite 3 5-decade
rosaries on the month of May in honour of Mary. Mortification. Much public
attention has focused on Opus Dei's practice of mortification — the voluntary
offering up of discomfort or pain to God; this includes fasting, or in some
circumstances self-inflicted pain such as self-flagellation. Mortification has
a long history in many world religions, including the Catholic Church. It has
been endorsed by Popes as a way of following Christ, who died in a bloody
crucifixion and who gave this advice: "let him deny himself, take up his cross
daily and follow me." (Lk 9:23) Supporters say that opposition to mortification
is rooted in having lost (1) the "sense of the enormity of sin" or offense
against God, and the consequent penance, both interior and exterior, (2) the
notions of "wounded human nature" and of concupiscence or inclination to sin,
and thus the need for "spiritual battle," and (3) a spirit of sacrifice for
love and "supernatural ends," and not only for physical enhancement. Critics
claim that "due to modern psychology and thinking, the practices which inflict
pain are sometimes considered to be counterproductive to one's spiritual
development, as they can easily lead to pride and an unhealthy attitude toward
one's body." As a spirituality for ordinary people, Opus Dei focuses on
performing sacrifices pertaining to normal duties and to its emphasis on
charity and cheerfulness. Additionally, Opus Dei celibate members practise
"corporal mortifications" such as sleeping without a pillow or sleeping on the
floor, fasting or remaining silent for certain hours during the day.
Organization and activities. Governance. In Pope John Paul II's 1982 decree
known as the Apostolic constitution "Ut Sit", Opus Dei was established as a
personal prelature, a new official structure of the Catholic Church, similar to
a diocese in that it contains lay people and secular priests who are led by a
bishop. However, whereas a bishop normally has a territory or diocese, the
prelate of Opus Dei is pastor to the members and priests of Opus Dei worldwide,
no matter what diocese they are in. To date, Opus Dei is the only personal
prelature in existence. In addition to being governed by "Ut Sit" and by the
Catholic Church's general law, Opus Dei is governed by the Church's Particular
Law concerning Opus Dei, otherwise known as Opus Dei's statutes. This specifies
the objectives and workings of the prelature. The prelature is under the
Congregation for Bishops. The head of the Opus Dei prelature is known as the
Prelate. The Prelate is the primary governing authority and is assisted by two
councils — the General Council (made up of men) and the Central Advisory
(made up of women). The Prelate holds his position for life. The current
prelate of Opus Dei is Javier Echevarria Rodriguez, who became the second
Prelate of Opus Dei in 1994. The first Prelate of Opus Dei was Álvaro del
Portillo, who held the position from 1982 until his death in 1994. Opus Dei's
highest assembled bodies are the General Congresses, which are usually convened
once every eight years. There are separate congresses for the men and women's
branch of Opus Dei. The General Congresses are made up of members appointed by
the Prelate, and are responsible for advising him about the prelature's future.
The men's General Congress also elects the Prelate from a list of candidates
chosen by their female counterparts. After the death of a Prelate, a special
elective General Congress is convened. The women nominate their preferred
candidates for the prelate and is voted upon by the men to become the next
Prelate — an appointment that must be confirmed by the Pope. Membership.
Based on the language of Catholic Church law and theology, the prelature calls
the people under the pastoral care of the prelate as "faithful of the
prelature", since the term member connotes an association rather than a
hierarchical structure such as a prelature or a diocese. As of 2010, the
faithful of the Opus Dei Prelature numbered 90,260, of which 88,245 are lay
persons, men and women, and 2015 priests. These figures do not include the
priest members of Opus Dei's Priestly Society of the Holy Cross, estimated to
number 2000 in the year 2005. About 60% of Opus Dei faithful reside in Europe,
and 35% reside in the Americas. For the most part, Opus Dei faithful belong to
the middle-to-low levels in society, in terms of education, income, and social
status. Supernumeraries, the largest type, currently account for about 70% of
the total membership. Typically, supernumeraries are married men and women with
careers. Supernumeraries devote a portion of their day to prayer, in addition
to attending regular meetings and taking part in activities such as retreats.
Due to their career and family obligations, supernumeraries are not as
available to the organisation as the other types of faithful, but they
typically contribute financially to Opus Dei, and they lend other types of
assistance as their circumstances permit. Numeraries, the second largest type
of the faithful of Opus Dei, comprise about 20% of total membership. Numeraries
are celibate members who usually live in special centers run by Opus Dei. Both
men and women may become numeraries, although the centers are strictly gender-
segregated. Numeraries generally have careers and devote the bulk of their
income to the organisation. Numerary assistants are unmarried, celibate female
faithful of Opus Dei. They live in special centres run by Opus Dei but do not
have jobs outside the centres — instead, their professional life is dedicated
to looking after the domestic needs of the centers and their residents.
Associates are unmarried, celibate faithful who typically have family or
professional obligations. Unlike numeraries and numerary assistants, the
associates do not live in Opus Dei centres. The Clergy of the Opus Dei
Prelature are priests who are under the jurisdiction of the Prelate of Opus
Dei. They are a minority in Opus Dei— only about 2% of Opus Dei members are
part of the clergy. Typically, they are numeraries or associates who ultimately
joined the priesthood. The consists of priests associated with Opus Dei. Part
of the society is made up of the clergy of the Opus Dei prelature — priests
who fall under the jurisdiction of the Opus Dei prelature are automatically
members of the Priestly Society. Other members in the society are diocesan
priests — clergymen who remain under the jurisdiction of a geographically
defined diocese. These priests are considered full members of Opus Dei who are
given its spiritual training. They do not however report to the Opus Dei
Prelate but to their own diocesan bishop. As of 2005, there were roughly two
thousand of these priests. The Cooperators of Opus Dei are non-members who
collaborate in some way with Opus Dei — usually through praying, charitable
contributions, or by providing some other assistance. Cooperators are not
required to be celibate or to adhere to any other special requirements. Indeed,
cooperators are not even required to be Christian. There were 164,000
cooperators in the year 2005. In accordance with Catholic theology, membership
is granted when a vocation, or divine calling is presumed to have occurred.
Activities. Leaders of Opus Dei describe the organization as a teaching entity,
whose main activity is to train Catholics to assume personal responsibility in
sanctifying the secular world from within. This teaching is done by means of
theory and practice. Its lay people and priests organize seminars, workshops,
retreats, and classes to help people put the Christian faith into practice in
their daily lives. Spiritual direction, one-on-one coaching with a more
experienced lay person or priest, is considered the "paramount means" of
training. Through these activities they provide religious instruction
(doctrinal formation), coaching in spirituality for lay people (spiritual
formation), character and moral education (human formation), lessons in
sanctifying one's work (professional formation), and know-how in evangelizing
one's family and workplace (apostolic formation). The official Catholic
document which established the prelature states that Opus Dei strives "to put
into practice the teaching of the universal call to sanctity, and to promote at
all levels of society the sanctification of ordinary work, and by means of
ordinary work." Thus, the founder and his followers describe members of Opus
Dei as resembling the members of the early Christian Church — ordinary
workers who seriously sought holiness with nothing exterior to distinguish them
from other citizens. Opus Dei runs residential centres throughout the world.
These centers provide residential housing for celibate members, undertake
recruitment, and provide doctrinal and theological education. Opus Dei is also
responsible for a variety of non-profit institutions called "Corporate Works of
Opus Dei". A study of the year 2005, showed that members have cooperated with
other people in setting up a total of 608 social initiatives: schools and
university residences (68%), technical or agricultural training centres (26%),
universities, business schools and hospitals (6%). The University of Navarra in
Pamplona, Spain is a corporate work of Opus Dei which has been rated as one of
the top private universities in the country, while its business school, IESE,
was adjudged one of the best in the world by the "Financial Times" and the
"Economist Intelligence Unit". The total assets of non-profits connected to
Opus Dei are worth at least $2.8 billion. Relations with Catholic leaders.
Leopoldo Eijo y Garay, the bishop of Madrid where Opus Dei was born, supported
Opus Dei and defended it in the 1940s by saying that "this "opus" is truly
"Dei"" (this work is truly God's). Contrary to attacks of secrecy and heresy,
the bishop described Opus Dei's founder as someone who is "open as a child" and
"most obedient to the Church hierarchy." In the 1950s, Pope Pius XII told the
most senior Australian bishop, Cardinal Norman Gilroy that Escriva “is a true
saint, a man sent by God for our times”. Opus Dei is "a vigorous expression
of the perennial youth of the Church, fully open to the demands of a modern
apostolate... We look with paternal satisfaction on all that Opus Dei has
achieved and is achieving for the kingdom of God, the desire of doing good that
guides it, the burning love for the Church and its visible head that
distinguishes it, and the ardent zeal for souls that impels it along the
arduous and difficult paths of the apostolate of presence and witness in every
sector of contemporary life." The relationship between Paul VI and Opus Dei,
according to Alberto Moncada, a doctor of sociology and ex-member, was
"stormy". After the Second Vatican Council concluded in 1965, Pope Paul VI
denied Opus Dei's petition to become a personal prelature, Moncada stated. Pope
John Paul I, a few years before his election, wrote that Escrivá was more
radical than other saints who taught about the universal call to holiness.
While others emphasized monastic spirituality applied to lay people, for
Escrivá "it is the material work itself which must be turned into prayer and
sanctity", thus providing a lay spirituality. Criticisms against Opus Dei have
prompted Catholics like Piers Paul Read and Vittorio Messori to call Opus Dei a
sign of contradiction, in reference to the biblical quote of Jesus as a "sign
that is spoken against." Said John Carmel Heenan, Cardinal Archbishop of
Westminster: "One of the proofs of God's favour is to be a sign of
contradiction. Almost all founders of societies in the Church have suffered.
Monsignor Escrivá de Balaguer is no exception. Opus Dei has been attacked and
its motives misunderstood. In this country and elsewhere an inquiry has always
vindicated Opus Dei."  One-third of the world's bishops petitioned for the
canonisation of Escrivá. During the canonisation, there were 42 cardinals and
470 bishops from around the world, generals superior of many religious
institutes, and representatives of various Catholic groups. During those days,
these Church officials commented on the universal reach and validity of the
message of the founder. For his canonisation homily, John Paul II said: With
the teachings of St. Josemaría, "it is easier to understand what the Second
Vatican Council affirmed: 'there is no question, then, of the Christian message
inhibiting men from building up the world ... on the contrary it is an
incentive to do these very things' (Vatican II, "Gaudium et spes," n. 34)."
Concerning the group's role in the Catholic Church, critics have argued that
Opus Dei's unique status as a personal prelature gives it too much
independence, making it essentially a "church within a church" and that Opus
Dei exerts a disproportionately large influence within the Catholic Church
itself, as illustrated, for example, by the unusually rapid , which some
considered to be irregular. In contrast, Catholic officials say that Church
authorities have even greater control of Opus Dei now that its head is a
prelate appointed by the Pope, and its status as a prelature "precisely means
dependence." Allen says that Escriva's relatively quick canonization does not
have anything to do with power but with improvements in procedures and John
Paul II's decision to make Escriva's sanctity and message known. The current
pope, Benedict XVI, is also a particularly strong supporter of Opus Dei and of
Escrivá. Pointing to the name "Work of God", Benedict XVI (then Cardinal
Joseph Ratzinger), wrote that "The Lord simply made use of [Escrivá] who
allowed God to work." Ratzinger cited Escrivá for correcting the mistaken idea
that holiness is reserved to some extraordinary people who are completely
different from ordinary sinners: Even if he can be very weak, with many
mistakes in his life, a saint is nothing other than to speak with God as a
friend speaks with a friend, allowing God to work, the Only One who can really
make the world both good and happy. "the theocentrism of Escrivá...means this
confidence in the fact that God is working now and we ought only to put
ourselves at his disposal...This, for me, is a message of greatest importance.
It is a message that leads to overcoming what could be considered the great
temptation of our times: the pretense that after the 'Big Bang' God retired
from history." Controversy. Throughout its history, Opus Dei has been
criticized from many quarters, prompting journalists to describe Opus Dei as
"the most controversial force in the Catholic Church" and founder Saint
Josemaría Escrivá as a "polarizing" figure. The organisation has been
criticized for issues relating to the Catholic Church, especially the practice
of mortification of the flesh. Controversies about Opus Dei have centered
around criticisms of its behaviours, such as alleged secretiveness, aggressive
recruiting methods, and its strict rules governing members. The organization's
members have also been categorized by critics as right-leaning elitists, with
some individuals supporting fascist governments, such as the Francoist
Government of Spain until 1978. Supporting views. According to several
journalists who have worked independently on Opus Dei, such as John Allen, Jr.,
Vittorio Messori, Patrice de Plunkett, Maggy Whitehouse, Noam Friedlander many
of the criticisms against Opus Dei are myths and unproven tales. Allen,
Messori, and Plunkett say that most of these myths were created by its
opponents, with Allen adding that he perceives that Opus Dei members generally
practise what they preach. Allen, Messori, and Plunkett also state that
accusations that Opus Dei is secretive are unfounded. These accusations stem
from a clerical paradigm which expects Opus Dei members to behave as monks and
clerics, people who are traditionally known and externally identifiable as
seekers of holiness. In contrast, these journalists continue, Opus Dei's lay
members, like any normal Catholic professional, are ultimately responsible for
their personal actions, and do not externally represent the organization which
provides them religious education. Writer and broadcast analyst John L. Allen,
Jr. states that Opus Dei provides abundant information about itself. These
journalists have stated that the historic roots of criticisms against Opus Dei
can be found in influential clerical circles. As to its alleged participation
in right-wing politics, especially the Francoist regime, British historians
Paul Preston and Brian Crozier state that the Opus Dei members who were
Franco's ministers were appointed for their talent and not for their Opus Dei
membership. Also, there were notable members of Opus Dei who were vocal critics
of the Franco Regime such as Rafael Calvo Serer and Antonio Fontan, who was the
first President of the Senate in Spain, following the adoption of a democratic
Constitution. The German historian and Opus Dei member Peter Berglar calls any
connection made between Opus Dei and Franco's regime a "gross slander." At the
end of Franco's regime, Opus Dei members were 50:50 for and against Franco,
according to John Allen. Similarly Álvaro del Portillo, the former Prelate of
Opus Dei, said that any statements that Escrivá supported Hitler were "a
patent falsehood," that were part of "a slanderous campaign". He and others
have stated that Escriva condemned Hitler as a "rogue", a "racist" and a
"tyrant". Opus Dei spokespersons also deny claims that Opus Dei members worked
with General Pinochet. Various authors state that Escriva was staunchly non-
political, and detested dictatorships. Allen wrote that, compared with other
Catholic organizations, Opus Dei's stress on freedom and personal
responsibility is extraordinarily strong. There are many Opus Dei members who
are identified with left-wing politics, including Ruth Kelly, Jorge Rossi
Chavarría and Jesus Estanislao. While Opus Dei spokespersons have admitted
mistakes in dealing with some members and do not, as a rule, contest their
grievances, supporters have rejected generalisations merely based on negative
experiences of some members. Sociologists like Bryan R. Wilson write about some
former members of any religious group who may have psychological motivations
such as self-justification to criticise their former groups. Wilson states that
such individuals are prone to create fictitious "atrocity stories" which have
no basis in reality. Many supporters of Opus Dei have expressed the belief that
the criticisms of Opus Dei stem from a generalised disapproval of spirituality,
Christianity, or Catholicism. Expressing this sentiment, one Opus Dei member,
Cardinal Julián Herranz, stated "Opus Dei has become a victim of
Christianophobia." Massimo Introvigne, author of an encyclopedia of religion,
argues that critics employ the term "cult" in order to intentionally stigmatize
Opus Dei because "they could not tolerate 'the return to religion' of the
secularized society". Opus Dei is not "elitist" in the sense in which people
often invoke the term, meaning an exclusively white-collar phenomenon,
concluded John Allen. He observed that among its members are barbers,
bricklayers, mechanics and fruit sellers. Most supernumeraries are living
ordinary middle-class lives, he said. Regarding alleged misogyny, John Allen
states that half of the leadership positions in Opus Dei are held by women, and
they supervise men. The Catholic Church defends its male priesthood by saying
that "the greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven are not the ministers but the
saints." Critical views. In the English-speaking world, the most vocal critic
of Opus Dei is an internet-based blogging website called the "Opus Dei
Awareness Network" (ODAN). ODAN describes itself as an organisation that exists
"to provide education, outreach and support to people who have been adversely
affected by Opus Dei." ODAN is headed by Diane DiNicola, mother of a former
member, Tammy DiNicola. Other major critics include Maria Carmen del Tapia, an
ex-member who was a high-ranking officer of Opus Dei for many years, liberal
Catholic theologians such as Fr. James Martin, a Jesuit writer and editor, and
supporters of Liberation theology, such as journalist Penny Lernoux and Michael
Walsh, a writer on religious matters and former Jesuit. "A cross embracing the
world"]] Critics state that Opus Dei is "intensely secretive"— for example,
members generally do not disclose their affiliation with Opus Dei in public.
Further, under the 1950 constitution, members were expressly forbidden to
reveal themselves without the permission of their superiors. This practice has
led to much speculation about who may be a member. Opus Dei has been accused of
deceptive and aggressive recruitment practices such as showering potential
members with intense praise ("Love bombing"), instructing numeraries to form
friendships and attend social gatherings explicitly for recruiting purposes,
and requiring regular written reports from its members about those friends who
are potential recruits. Organisations such as ODAN allege that Opus Dei
maintains an extremely high degree of control over its members— for instance,
past rules required numeraries to submit their incoming and outgoing mail to
their superiors for inspection, and members are forbidden to read certain books
without permission from their superiors. Critics charge that Opus Dei pressures
numeraries to sever contact with non-members, including their own families.
Exit counselor David Clark has described Opus Dei as "very cult-like". Critics
assert that Escrivá and the organisation supported radical right-wing
governments, such as those of Augusto Pinochet and Alberto Fujimori of Peru
during the 1990s. Both Pinochet's and Fujimori's ministries and prominent
supporters allegedly included members of Opus Dei, but there are also prominent
Opus Dei members in parties that opposed those governments. There have also
been allegations that Escrivá expressed sympathy for Adolf Hitler. One former
Opus Dei priest, Vladimir Felzmann, who has become a vocal Opus Dei critic,
says that Escrivá once remarked that Hitler had been "badly treated" by the
world and he further declared that "Hitler couldn't have been such a bad
person. He couldn't have killed six million . It couldn't have been more than
four million." Opus Dei has also been accused of elitism through targeting of
"the intellectual elite, the well-to-do, and the socially prominent." As a part
of the Roman Catholic Church, Opus Dei has been open to the same criticisms as
Catholicism in general— for example female members of Opus Dei cannot become
priests or prelates. Specifically, Opus Dei’s position has been “to oppose
sexual freedoms and promote conservative morals," according to an investigative
report produced by the advocacy group Catholics for Choice The report further
cites a study from sociologist Marco Burgos alleging Opus Dei interference in
sex education programs in Honduras. After conducting a critical study of Opus
Dei, journalist John Allen, Jr. concluded that Opus Dei should (1) be more
transparent, (2) collaborate with members of religious institutes, and (3)
encourage its members to air out in public their criticisms of the institution.
Other views. Sociologists Peter Berger and Samuel Huntington suggest that Opus
Dei is involved in "a deliberate attempt to construct an alternative
modernity," one that engages modern culture while at the same time is
resolutely loyal to Catholic traditions. Van Biema of "Time" magazine
emphasises Opus Dei's Spanish roots as a source of misunderstandings in the
Anglo-Saxon world, and suggests that as the United States becomes more
Hispanic, controversies about Opus Dei (and similar Catholic organizations)
will decrease. In her 2006 book on Opus Dei, Maggy Whitehouse, a non-Catholic
journalist, argues that the relative autonomy of each director and centre has
resulted in mistakes at the local level. She recommends greater consistency and
transparency for Opus Dei, which she sees as having learned the lesson of
greater openness when it faced the issues raised by "The Da Vinci Code" and
other critics.
