Gnosticism and the New Testament Gnosticism and the New Testament is the
connection between the Christian sects described by Irenaeus (c.180), and other
writers, as "gnostikos", and the New Testament, and also the use of the New
Testament in the Nag Hammadi texts (c.300-400). The Valentians' use of the New
Testament. Gnostic interpretations of Paul's teachings. The followers of
Valentinius attempted to systematically decode the Epistles, claiming that most
Christians made the mistake of reading the Epistles literally rather than
allegorically. Valentians understood the conflict between "Jews" and "Gentiles"
in Romans to be a coded reference to the differences between "Psychics" (people
who are partly spiritual but have not yet achieved separation from carnality)
and "Pneumatics" (totally spiritual people). The Valentians argued that such
codes were intrinsic in gnosticism, secrecy being important to ensuring proper
progression to true inner understanding. In 2 Corinthians, Paul states he had
heard "ineffable words which it is not lawful for a man to utter", a position
that gnostic initiates supported with respect to the higher gnostic teachings.
However, Paul does also suggest "Gnosis puffeth up" (often this passage is
found with "gnosis" translated - "knowledge puffeth up"), which appears to
diminish support for gnosticism, but Clement of Alexandria offered the
explanation that this meant "to entertain great and true sentiments" and was a
reference to the magnitude of the effect of receiving it. Counter-arguments.
Irenaeus argued that the use of scripture by Gnostic groups, such as the
Valentinians, was flawed, and demonstrated his argument by taking arbitrary
passages from various writings of Homer to compose a new story about Hercules.
While the individual passages were authentic, the connected story was not of
Homer's composition, and in fact the passages featured a number of different
characters instead of just Hercules. Irenaeus compared this abuse of Homer to
what he considered as abuse of the New and Old Testaments by the gnostics.
Gnosticism. The Gnostics were a rather diverse group of early movements finding
a basis often in Christianity or Judaism. These people did not refer to
themselves as "Gnostics" but rather the label was applied mostly by their
opponents and modern scholars. The movements were strongly associated with
mysticism, and the thread connecting them was the concept of "gnosis", which
refers to an intimately personal kind of knowledge (as in the Spanish "conocer"
rather than "saber" or German "kennen" versus "wissen"). The Gnostic movements
were centered around "gnosis" of the divine rather than faith ("pistis") and
therefore are often associated with mysticism. The Albigensian and Cathar
movements of the Middle Ages are often linked to Gnosticism. Many Gnostic
movements made extensive use of allegory and metaphor in their interpretation
of spiritual texts. The Canonical Gospels. In academic circles, three of the
four canonical Gospels (Matthew, Mark, and Luke) are regarded as so similar in
wording and content that they are often treated as one unit, the synoptic
gospels. According to the majority of scholars, the solution to the synoptic
problem of similar content and dependence is the two-source hypothesis - that
the three synoptic gospels are not totally independent but derive from two
source texts, one being the Markan priority, the other being a hypothetical
lost collection of logia (sayings) known as the Q document, and the few
remaining elements unique to Matthew or to Luke are known as M or L,
respectively. No ancient gnostic text explicitly refers to an original document
of sayings. The oldest extant fragments of gospels are of John, and by
tradition Mark was the first written. Sayings in Matthew and Luke attributed to
Q. Some of the sayings written in Matthew and Luke and attributed to Q are
seemingly contradictory statements that hint at the Kingdom of God, for example
Luke 17:33: "Whoever seeks to gain his life will lose it, but whoever loses his
life will preserve it" and Luke 13:30:"Some are last who will be first, and
some are first who will be last". Other sayings are interpreted by gnostics as
having reference to secret teachings and knowledge to be revealed or learned
— themes intrinsic to the idea of gnosis — such as Luke 12:2: "Nothing is
covered up that will not be revealed, or hidden that will not be known". The
Gospel of John. To the gnostics, the Gospel of John shows the clearest
similarity to later gnostic writing style in general, and to them parts of the
gospel have a similar dream-like quality to the writing (compare the Gospel of
Truth, more especially the Trimorphic Protennoia). The phrase ""and the Word
became flesh, and dwelt amongst us"" is generally seen as being against
docetism, a belief that many Gnostics held that the human nature of Jesus was
illusory, as the "Perfect Saviour" inherent in a "Christ" could not partake in
the inherently corrupt (according to gnosticism) nature of matter. Also, the
opening phrase is generally understood as being against Arianism, a 4th century
sect of Christianity, later branded as heretical, which asserted that there was
a time previous to Jesus' existence. Much of John has this form, consistently
drawing on positions held by later 2nd century and early 3rd century groups in
order to contradict them and cast them as heretical. In the case of these
supposed 3rd century groups Rylands Library Papyrus P52, Papyrus 66, Papyrus 75
all have been dated to be before the 3rd century. These groups frequently did
not exist in the late 1st century and early 2nd century, Arianism being a prime
example, and it would be odd for them to arise if a gospel was circulating
which so clearly condemned the positions that did not yet exist. For this
reason, and since also the first quotations from the Gospel of John appear in
the anti-heresy works of Irenaeus, many scholars like K.G. Bretschneider
(1776–1848), Hegel and F.C. Baur (born 1792 - died 1860) cast doubt on the
Authorship of the Gospel of John, and often consider it to have been a 2nd
century polemic by an author holding what later became the position of the
orthodoxy. Most of the above is called into question by Rylands Library Papyrus
P52 which contains a fragment from John chapter 18 dated with a fair measure of
confidence to the first half of the 2nd century. As well as the recent work of
Charles Hill's "The Johannine Corpus in the Early Church". In which Charles
Hill gives evidence that the Gospel of John was used between CE 90 and 130, the
possible use of uniquely Johannine gospel material in several works which date
from this period. These works and authors include Ignatius (c.107); Polycarp
(c.107); Papias’ elders (c.110-120); Hierapolis' Exegesis of the Lord’s
Oracles (c.120-132). Elaine Pagels, a prolific modern writer on Gnosticism, has
written a book on the role of John in Gnosticism: " Johannine Gospel in Gnostic
Exegesis: Heracleon's Commentary on John. " The Pauline Epistles. It has been
hypothesized by scholars such as Hyam Maccoby and Elaine Pagels - as well as
the mystic Timothy Freke, that Paul of Tarsus was a Gnostic who developed the
early Christian church as a mystery religion with a Jewish flavour, and that
elements of this church forgot or misunderstood the mystery elements, largely
abandoned its Jewish foundation, and took up literal interpretation of the
text. Their argument for Paul being a gnostic is based on arguments about the
authorship of the Pauline Epistles. The pastoral epistles (those to Timothy and
Titus), are generally acknowledged as being clearly anti-gnostic, and the
second Epistle to the Thessalonians clearly refutes certain gnostic
interpretations of the first Epistle to the Thessalonians. Paul and Hellenic
influence. Besides being a Jew (of the tribe of Benjamin), and a member of the
conservative Pharisee party prior to conversion, Paul could also write in
Greek, and also refer to the Septuagint (a Greek translation of the Hebrew
Bible), rather than translating the Hebrew text.. He grew up in Tarsus, which
at the time of Paul was the dominant centre for Hellenic philosophy, Strabo
commenting that Tarsus had surpassed Athens and Alexandria in this extent.
Although educated in Jerusalem, Paul expresses in his writing many ideas seen
on Hellenic thought, previously used by philosophers such as Plato. For
example, Paul refers to the solar cycle known as "the great year", as well as
to the idea that one is only wise if one knows that one knows nothing.
According to the book of Acts, Paul's ministry takes him to cities dominated by
mystery religions, such as Antioch (a centre for Adonis), Ephesus (a centre for
Attis), and Corinth (a centre for the Dionysian Mysteries). Terminology adopted
by Paul. In 1 Corinthians, Paul considers himself as "servants of Christ and
stewards of the mysteries of God" which some suggest was also the technical
term for a priest in Egyptian mystery religions where the central figure was
the god Serapis. Paul also claims to know someone who ascended as far as the
third heaven, a principle which in mystery religions represented the degree of
initiation achieved (for example, in the Mithraic mysteries there were 7
heavens, one for each of the 5 known planets, the sun, and the moon). The
Mormon faith interpret the third heaven as the Celestial Kingdom. Paul's story
appears to have been a one time event however, and he claims uncertainty as to
whether the visit to the third heaven was in the body or out of the body. In
Galatians 3:19-20, Paul states that the Law is the product of a "mediator", and
that "the mediator is not one, God is one". The gnostics treated this as a
reference to the standard gnostic teaching that the law should not apply since
it was the product of the evil demiurge. Gnostics also referred to the demiurge
as the mediator between God (whom they considered the only being to be singular
and whole, and thus also referred to as Monad), and creation (which they
considered intrinsically evil, rather than evil as the consequence of some
human error). Though this does not hold true with the reference of the demiurge
in gnosticism as blind and ignorant of his origin or the monad. In Romans, Paul
clearly speaks of creation as awaiting redemption, rather than treating it as
something irredeemable. He also refers to the law as the 'instructor' or
'tutor' of the Jewish people, and as the beginning of God's work of turning
people back to Himself, rather than as something opposed to God this being
opposed to the works of Marcion who stated that the God of the Old Testament
and law was the devil or demiurge. Paul and the early church. The continual
growth of Gnostic followings throughout the 2nd century troubled proto-orthodox
Christians. To refute it Irenaeus wrote a vast five-volume book ("On the
Detection and Overthrow of the So-Called Gnosis" commonly referred to as
"Against Heresies"). The significance of Paul's influence was sufficient for
Irenaeus to consider it important to proclaim that Paul was never gnostic and
never supported gnostic teachings, using the evidence of the Pastoral epistles
and the Gospel of John to support it. Despite Irenaeus' claims for Paul's non
gnosticism, Valentinus, the leader of a large faction of gnostics, claimed that
Paul had initiated his own teacher Theudas into the "Deeper Mysteries" of
Christianity, which revealed a secret gnostic doctrine of God. From the
beginning of modern biblical criticism with F.C. Baur, it has been argued that
the Pseudo-Clementines, texts that in early times were frequently regarded as
part of Biblical canon, are a coded attack on Paul, fictionalising him under
the name of "Simon Magus", in deliberate contrast to "Simon Peter". Though as
Paul is traditionally considered to have died in 67 and Marcion was born in
110, it has been argued that it is quite implausible for the two to ever have
met; this also applies to Simon Magus who was said by the Book of Acts to have
been teaching during the time of Simon Peter, and was said to have died during
Peter's preaching (Clement of Rome attests to Peter himself dying before 90).
Thus it is clear that neither Irenaeus nor Marcion himself can have been
suggesting that Marcion was literally the immediate heir of Simon Magus or
Paul, respectively, but instead must have been suggesting that Marcion was the
latest in the line of heirs. Grades of revelation. In 1 Corinthians 3:2, Paul
goes on to state 'I fed you with milk, not solid food, for you were not ready
for it, for you are still of the flesh", which Gnostics interpret as the
suggestion that the Corinthians were still Hylic (i.e. had not passed even the
first level of understanding). Paul previously stated in 1 Corinthians 2:14
"The natural person does not accept the things of the Spirit of God, for they
are folly to him, and he is not able to understand them because they are
spiritually discerned", offering an explanation which coincides with the
gnostic teaching of levels of comprehension." Gnostics viewed scripture as
allegory, only serving a literal meaning to Hylic (i.e. uninitiate) people,
partly for the purpose of advertising. Gnostics thus interpreted Paul's
statements, that the Old Testament acts as "our examples" in 1 Corinthians 10:
6 and that "For the letter kills, but the Spirit gives life" in 2 Corinthians
3:6, as supporting this view, with understanding more important than rigid
adherence. Gnostics also took to a more gnostic interpretation the phrase
"though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no
more" in 2 Corinthians 5:16 as indicative of Paul's progress from Hylic, rather
than the understanding of Christ's time being in the past. Paul states in
Romans 8:3 that Christ came in the "homoioma" of human flesh. "Homoioma" means
"image" or "representation" (the text is usually translated "in the likeness of
human flesh"). Some gnostic groups treated this as admittance of Docetism, with
the Christ being the divine wisdom which revealed gnosis, which would help
humanity escape the evil creation (the world) of the demiurge, and having no
physical existence. Though Paul never speaks of the creator or nature as evil.
In Epistle to the Galatians 1:15 and 1:16 Paul states of his conversion that
"God revealed his Son in me", rather than "to me", which Gnostics interpret as
a reference to Christ being the divine gnosis sent to save humanity, rather
than a physical creature or person. In the same letter, Paul also states in
Galatians 2:20 that "I am crucified with Christ: nevertheless I live; yet not
I, but Christ liveth in me", which gnostics took as further evidence of Paul
supporting their stance. Resurrection. The gnostics took an esoteric view of
death, and therefore of resurrection. When Paul states in Romans that "he that
is dead is freed from sin", and that "we are buried with him by baptism into
death", the gnostics assumed it was a reference to the teaching that the body
is the work of the evil demiurge, and that death would release the divine part
of a person from the demiurge's power. Gnostics also took death to be symbolic
for the death of the part of a person tied to the demiurge, and the
consequential "resurrection" as a new entirely spiritual being, understanding
resurrection as an awakening of spiritual enlightenment. In Philippians, Paul
refers to himself as partaking in the same death as Christ, and thence
partaking in the resurrection of the dead, which suited gnostic
interpretations. Paul's references to reaping and sowing of crops, in 1
Corinthians, was also a common image from the mystery religions symbolising the
esoteric death and resurrection of initiates. In the First Epistle to the
Corinthians, however, during chapter 15, Paul appears to give credence to a
more literal idea of the physical resurrection of the dead. However, as noted
by many gnostics, Paul also states "flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom
of God". Irenaeus complained that "all heretics always introduce this passage".
It is widely thought by scholars that the presence of the issue proved such a
problem that someone felt the need to forge a third letter to the Corinthians,
which explicitly states the dead are resurrected physically. Despite this, 3
Corinthians was rejected from biblical canon, and thus became part of the New
Testament apocrypha. In 1 Corinthians 15, Paul also refers to baptism for the
dead (15:29), a concept according to Elaine Pagels, was easily explained by
gnostics. Since the gnostics argued that the text was allegory, their stance
was that "baptism for the dead" refers to pneumatics (i.e. gnostics) taking the
place of psychics (i.e. literalists), who were "dead" to gnosis. Tertullian
wrote about Marcion gnostics in his work Against Marcion indicating that there
they believed in baptism of the dead. The doctrines of Marcion were so similar
to the Gnostics that the church father Irenaeus, a disciple of Polycarp in the
180s regarded him as one of them. John Gill in his commentary of 1 Corinthians
15:29 remarked, "...some think the apostle has in view a custom of some, who
when their friends died without baptism, used to be baptized in their room;
this is said to be practiced by the Marcionites in Tertullian's time, and by
the Corinthians in the times of the Apostle John; but it does not appear to
have been in use in the times of the Apostle Paul; and besides, if it had been,
as it was a vain and superstitious one, he would never have mentioned it
without a censure..." Jameison-Faussett-Brown commentary of 1 Corinthians 15:29
mentioned, "...Paul, without giving the least sanction to the practice, uses an
ad hominem argument from it against its practitioners, some of whom, though
using it, denied the resurrection: "What account can they give of their
practice; why are they at the trouble of it, if the dead rise not?"Jesus used
an ad hominem argument, Matthew 12:27. The best punctuation is, "If the dead
rise not at all, why are they then baptized for them" (so the oldest
manuscripts read the last words, instead of "for the dead")?" Ethics. One
feature that was contested amongst the gnostics was that of ethics. Gnostics
believed that since the world was intrinsically evil, so was anything the human
body did. Some gnostics concluded that this meant that one could engage in
gross immorality since it demonstrated the knowledge that the body was a prison
for the soul. Most gnostics, however, considered that instead one should
suppress the urges of the body as much as possible and live a highly ascetic
life. One consequence of this view was a lack of care to social status
(exhibited noticeably in Mithraism), or for that matter not caring about being/
not-being a slave, a criticism also levied at Paul for his lack of raising the
issue in Philemon. Paul also appears to many scholars to exhibit a strong
distaste for sexuality of any kind, supporting the principle of celibacy, which
gnostics interpreted as due to the idea of the world as evil, though non-
gnostics took it to be merely a rigid and strict adherence to the Old
Testament. Paul himself elsewhere states that he teaches "righteousness without
the Law" (Rom 3:21), which gnostics used as a counter argument to the claim he
adhered to the Old Testament, and also supported the idea that laws were
ultimately the product of the "demiurge" as a trap. Though once again Paul
never mentions an ignorant or evil creator or demiurge. In 1 Corinthians, Paul
does recommend celibacy, but also recommends marriage for those who are not
suited for celibacy. Later (1 Cor. 9:5), he defends the right of Peter and the
other apostles to be married and to travel accompanied by their wives, although
most scholars determine Paul himself to be unmarried. In contrast, he condemned
sexual immorality of all kinds, in various epistles (Romans 13:13, 1 Cor. 6:18,
1 Thess. 4:3), along with several other categories of sins, and making no
exceptions for these.
