Pentecostalism Pentecostalism or Classical Pentecostalism is a renewal movement
within Christianity that places special emphasis on a direct personal
experience of God through the baptism with the Holy Spirit. The term
"Pentecostal" is derived from Pentecost, the Greek name for the Jewish Feast of
Weeks. For Christians, this event commemorates the descent of the Holy Spirit
upon the followers of Jesus Christ, as described in the second chapter of the
Book of Acts. Like other forms of evangelical Protestantism, Pentecostalism
adheres to the inerrancy of scripture and the necessity of accepting Christ as
personal lord and savior. It is distinguished by belief in the baptism with the
Holy Spirit as an experience separate from conversion that enables a Christian
to live a Holy Spirit filled and empowered life. This empowerment includes the
use of spiritual gifts such as speaking in tongues and divine healing–two
other defining characteristics of Pentecostalism. Because of their commitment
to biblical authority, spiritual gifts, and the miraculous, Pentecostals tend
to see their movement as reflecting the same kind of spiritual power and
teachings that were found in the Apostolic Age of the early church. For this
reason, some Pentecostals also use the term "Apostolic" or "full gospel" to
describe their movement. The first Pentecostals were radical adherents of the
Holiness Movement. These early 20th century Christians were energized by
revivalism and expectation for the imminent Second Coming of Christ. Believing
that they were living in the end times, these evangelicals expected God to
spiritually renew the Christian Church thereby bringing to pass the restoration
of spiritual gifts and the evangelization of the world. In 1900, Charles
Parham, an American evangelist and faith healer, began teaching that speaking
in tongues was the Bible evidence of Spirit baptism. The three-year-long Azusa
Street Revival in Los Angeles, California, resulted in the spread of
Pentecostalism throughout the United States and the rest of the world as
visitors carried the Pentecostal experience back to their home churches or felt
called to the mission field. While virtually all Pentecostal denominations
trace their origins to Azusa Street, the movement has experienced a variety of
divisions and controversies. An early dispute centered around challenges to the
doctrine of the Trinity. As a result, the Pentecostal Movement is divided
between trinitarian and non-trinitarian branches. Comprising over 700
denominations and a large amount of independent churches, there is no central
authority governing Pentecostalism; however, many denominations are affiliated
with the Pentecostal World Fellowship. There are over 279 million Pentecostals
worldwide, and the movement is growing in many parts of the world, especially
the global South. Since the 1960s, Pentecostalism has increasingly gained
acceptance from other Christian traditions, and Pentecostal beliefs concerning
Spirit baptism and spiritual gifts have been embraced by non-Pentecostal
Christians in Protestant, Catholic, and Orthodox churches through the
Charismatic Movement. Together, Pentecostal and Charismatic Christianity
numbers over 500 million adherents. Beliefs. Pentecostalism is an evangelical
faith, emphasizing the reliability of the Bible and the need for the
transformation of an individual's life through faith in Jesus. Like other
evangelicals, Pentecostals generally adhere to the Bible's divine inspiration
and inerrancy—the belief that the Bible, in the original languages in which
it was written, is infallible. Pentecostals emphasize the teaching of the "full
gospel" or "foursquare gospel". The term "foursquare" refers to the four
fundamental beliefs of Pentecostalism: Jesus saves according to ; baptizes with
the Holy Spirit according to Acts 2:4; heals bodily according to James 5:15;
and is coming again to receive those who are saved according to 1 Thessalonians
4:16–17. Salvation. The central belief of Pentecostalism is that through the
death, burial, and resurrection of Jesus Christ, sins can be forgiven and
humanity reconciled with God. This is the Gospel or "good news". The
fundamental requirement of Pentecostalism is that one be born again. The new
birth is received by the grace of God through faith in Christ and acceptance of
him as personal Lord and Savior. In being born again, the believer is
regenerated, justified, adopted into the family of God, and sanctified.
Pentecostal soteriology is generally Arminian rather than Calvinist. The
security of the believer is a doctrine held within Pentecostalism;
nevertheless, faith and repentance are necessary for salvation and remain
necessary for the continuance of that salvation. Pentecostals believe in both a
literal heaven and hell, the former for those who have accepted God's gift of
salvation and the latter for those who have rejected it. For most Pentecostals,
there is no other requirement to receive salvation. Baptism with the Holy
Spirit and speaking in tongues are not generally required, though Pentecostal
converts are usually encouraged to seek these experiences. A notable exception
is Oneness Pentecostalism, most adherents of which believe both water baptism
and Spirit baptism are integral components of salvation. For a more detailed
explanation of Oneness Pentecostal beliefs, see the Statistics and
denominations section of this article below. Baptism with the Holy Spirit.
While the figure of Jesus Christ and his redemptive work are at the center of
Pentecostal theology, that redemptive work is believed to provide for a
fullness of the Holy Spirit of which believers in Christ may take advantage.
The majority of Pentecostals believe that at the moment a person is born again,
the new believer has the presence (indwelling) of the Holy Spirit. While the
Spirit "dwells" in every Christian, Pentecostals believe that all Christians
should seek to be "filled" with him. The Spirit's "filling", "falling upon",
"coming upon", or being "poured out upon" believers is called the baptism with
the Holy Spirit. Pentecostals define it as a definite experience occurring
after salvation whereby the Holy Spirit comes upon the believer to anoint and
empower him or her for special service. It has also been described as "a
baptism into the love of God". The main purpose of the experience is to grant
power for Christian service. Other purposes include power for spiritual warfare
(the Christian struggles against spiritual enemies and thus requires spiritual
power), power for overflow (the believer's experience of the presence and power
of God in his or her life flows out into the lives of others), and power for
ability (to follow divine direction, to face persecution, to exercise spiritual
gifts for the edification of the church, etc.). Pentecostals believe that the
baptism with the Holy Spirit is available to all Christians. Repentance from
sin and being born again are fundamental requirements to receive it. There must
also be in the believer a deep conviction of needing more of God in his or her
life, and a measure of consecration by which the believer yields himself or
herself to the will of God. Citing instances in the Book of Acts where
believers were Spirit baptized before they were baptized with water, most
Pentecostals believe a Christian need not have been baptized in water to
receive Spirit baptism. However, Pentecostals do believe that the biblical
pattern is "repentance, regeneration, water baptism, and then the baptism with
the Holy Ghost". There are Pentecostal believers who have claimed to receive
their baptism with the Holy Spirit while being water baptized. It is received
by having faith in God's promise to fill the believer and in yielding the
entire being to Christ. Certain conditions, if present in a believer's life,
could cause delay in receiving Spirit baptism, such as "weak faith, unholy
living, imperfect consecration, and egocentric motives". In the absence of
these, Pentecostals teach that seekers should maintain a persistent faith in
the knowledge that God will fulfill his promise. For Pentecostals, there is no
prescribed manner in which a believer will be filled with the Spirit. It could
be expected or unexpected, during public or private prayer. Pentecostals expect
certain results following baptism with the Holy Spirit. Some of these are
immediate while others are enduring or permanent. Some Pentecostal
denominations teach that speaking in tongues is an immediate or initial
physical evidence that one has received the experience. However, not all
Pentecostals share this doctrinal position. It is most prominent among white
Pentecostal denominations in the United States; elsewhere, beliefs are more
varied. Some teach that any of the gifts of the Spirit can be evidence of
having received Spirit baptism. Other immediate evidences include giving God
praise, having joy, and desiring to testify about Jesus. Enduring or permanent
results in the believer's life include Christ glorified and revealed in a
greater way, a "deeper passion for souls", greater power to witness to
nonbelievers, a more effective prayer life, greater love for and insight into
the Bible, and the manifestation of the gifts of the Spirit. While the baptism
with the Holy Spirit is a definite experience in a believer's life,
Pentecostals view it as just the beginning of living a Spirit-filled life.
Pentecostal teaching stresses the importance of continually being filled with
the Spirit. There is only one baptism with the Spirit, but there should be many
infillings with the Spirit throughout the believer's life. Divine healing.
Pentecostalism is a holistic faith, and the belief that Jesus is Healer is one-
fourth of the full gospel. Pentecostals cite four major reasons for believing
in divine healing: 1) it is reported in the Bible, 2) Jesus' healing ministry
is included in his atonement (thus divine healing is part of salvation), 3)
"the whole gospel is for the whole person"—spirit, soul, and body, 4)
sickness is a consequence of the Fall of Man and salvation is ultimately the
restoration of the fallen world. In the words of Pentecostal scholar Vernon L.
Purdy, "Because sin leads to human suffering, it was only natural for the Early
Church to understand the ministry of Christ as the alleviation of human
suffering, since he was God's answer to sin ... The restoration of fellowship
with God is the most important thing, but this restoration not only results in
spiritual healing but many times in physical healing as well". Pentecostals
believe that prayer is central in receiving healing. Pentecostals look to
scriptures such as James 5:13–16 for direction regarding healing prayer. One
can pray for one's own healing (verse 13) and for the healing of others (verse
16); no special gift or clerical status is necessary. Verses 14–16 supply the
framework for congregational healing prayer. The sick person expresses his or
her faith by calling for the elders of the church who pray over and anoint the
sick with olive oil. The oil is a symbol of the Holy Spirit. Eschatology. The
last element of the fourfold gospel is that Jesus is the "Soon Coming King".
For Pentecostals, "every moment is eschatological" since at any time Christ may
return. This "personal and imminent" Second Coming is for Pentecostals the
motivation for practical Christian living including: personal holiness, meeting
together for worship, faithful Christian service, and evangelism (both personal
and worldwide). Many, if not the majority, of Pentecostals are premillennial
dispensationalists believing in a pretribulation rapture. Spiritual gifts.
Pentecostals are continuationists, meaning they believe that all of the
spiritual gifts, including the miraculous or "sign gifts", found in 1
Corinthians 12:4-11, 12:27-31, Romans 12:3-8, and Ephesians 4:7-16 continue to
operate within the Church in the present time. Pentecostals place the gifts of
the Spirit in context with the fruit of the Spirit. The fruit of the Spirit is
the result of the new birth and continuing to abide in Christ. It is by the
fruit exhibited that spiritual character is assessed. Spiritual gifts are
received as a result of the baptism with the Holy Spirit. As gifts freely given
by the Holy Spirit, they cannot be earned or merited, and they are not
appropriate criteria with which to evaluate one's spiritual life or maturity.
Pentecostals see in the biblical writings of Paul an emphasis on having both
character and power, exercising the gifts in love. Just as fruit should be
evident in the life of every Christian, Pentecostals believe that every Spirit-
filled believer is given some capacity for the manifestation of the Spirit. It
is important to note that the exercise of a gift is a manifestation of the
Spirit, not of the gifted person, and though the gifts operate through people,
they are primarily gifts given to the Church. They are valuable only when they
minister spiritual profit and edification to the body of Christ. Pentecostal
writers point out that the lists of spiritual gifts in the New Testament do not
seem to be exhaustive. It is generally believed that there are as many gifts as
there are useful ministries and functions in the Church. A spiritual gift is
often exercised in partnership with another gift. For example, in a Pentecostal
church service, the gift of tongues might be exercised followed by the
operation of the gift of interpretation. According to Pentecostals, all
manifestations of the Spirit are to be judged by the church. This is made
possible, in part, by the gift of discerning of spirits, which is the capacity
for discerning the source of a spiritual manifestation—whether from the Holy
Spirit, an evil spirit, or from the human spirit. While Pentecostals believe in
the current operation of all the spiritual gifts within the church, their
teaching on some of these gifts has generated more controversy and interest
than others. These can usually be grouped into two categories: the vocal and
the power gifts. Vocal gifts. The gifts of prophecy, tongues, interpretation of
tongues, and words of wisdom and knowledge are called the vocal gifts.
Pentecostals look to 1 Corinthians 14 for instructions on the proper use of the
spiritual gifts, especially the vocal ones. Pentecostals believe that prophecy
is the vocal gift of preference, a view derived from 1 Corinthians 14. Some
teach that the gift of tongues is equal to the gift of prophecy when tongues
are interpreted. Prophetic and glossolalic utterances must be limited to two or
three within a single service, and they are not to replace the preaching of the
Word of God. Word of wisdom and word of knowledge. Pentecostals understand the
word of wisdom and the word of knowledge to be supernatural revelations of
wisdom and knowledge by the Holy Spirit. The word of wisdom is defined as a
revelation of the Holy Spirit that applies scriptural wisdom to a specific
situation that a Christian community faces. The word of knowledge is often
defined as the ability of one person to know what God is currently doing or
intends to do in the life of another person. Prophecy. Pentecostals agree with
the Protestant principle of "sola Scriptura". The Bible is the "all sufficient
rule for faith and practice"; it is "fixed, finished, and objective
revelation". Alongside this high regard for the authority of scripture is a
belief that the gift of prophecy continues to operate within the Church.
Pentecostal theologians Duffield and van Cleave described the gift of prophecy
in the following manner: "Normally, in the operation of the gift of prophecy,
the Spirit heavily anoints the believer to speak forth to the body not
premeditated words, but words the Spirit supplies spontaneously in order to
uplift and encourage, incite to faithful obedience and service, and to bring
comfort and consolation". Any Spirit-filled Christian, according to Pentecostal
theology, has the potential, as with all the gifts, to prophesy. Sometimes,
prophecy can overlap with preaching "where great unpremeditated truth or
application is provided by the Spirit, or where special revelation is given
beforehand in prayer and is empowered in the delivery". While a prophetic
utterance at times might foretell future events, this is not the primary
purpose of Pentecostal prophecy and is never to be used for personal guidance.
For Pentecostals, prophetic utterances are fallible, i.e. subject to error.
Pentecostals teach that believers must discern whether the utterance has
edifying value for themselves and the local church. Because prophecies are
subject to the judgement and discernment of other Christians, most Pentecostals
teach that prophetic utterances should never be spoken in the first person
(e.g. "I, the Lord") but always in the third person (e.g. "Thus saith the Lord"
or "The Lord would have..."). Tongues and interpretation. A Pentecostal
believer in a spiritual experience may vocalize fluent, unintelligible
utterances (glossolalia) or articulate an alleged natural language previously
unknown to them (xenoglossy). Commonly termed "speaking in tongues", this vocal
phenomenon is believed by Pentecostals to include an endless variety of
languages. According to Pentecostal theology, the language spoken (1) may be an
unlearned human language, such as the Bible claims happened on the Day of
Pentecost, or (2) it might be of heavenly (angelic) origin. In the first case,
tongues could work as a sign by which witness is given to the unsaved. In the
second case, tongues are used for praise and prayer when the mind is superseded
and "the speaker in tongues speaks to God, speaks mysteries, and ... no one
understands him". Within Pentecostalism, there is a belief that speaking in
tongues serves two functions. Tongues as the "initial evidence" of the baptism
with the Holy Spirit and in individual prayer serves a different purpose than
tongues as a spiritual gift. All Spirit-filled believers, according to initial
evidence proponents, will speak in tongues when baptized in the Spirit and,
thereafter, will be able to express prayer and praise to God in an unknown
tongue. This type of tongue speaking forms an important part of many
Pentecostals' personal daily devotions. When used in this way, it is referred
to as a "prayer language" as the believer is speaking unknown languages not for
the purpose of communicating with others but for "communication between the
soul and God". Its purpose is for the spiritual edification of the individual.
Pentecostals believe the private use of tongues in prayer (i.e. "prayer in the
Spirit") "promotes a deepening of the prayer life and the spiritual development
of the personality". From Romans 8:26-27, Pentecostals believe that the Spirit
intercedes for believers through tongues; in other words, when a believer prays
in an unknown tongue, the Holy Spirit is supernaturally directing the
believer's prayer. Besides acting as a prayer language, tongues also function
as the "gift of tongues". Not all Spirit-filled believers possess the gift of
tongues. Its purpose is for gifted persons to publicly "speak with God in
praise, to pray or sing in the Spirit, or to speak forth in the congregation".
There is a division among Pentecostals on the relationship between the gifts of
tongues and prophecy. One school of thought believes that the gift of tongues
is always directed from man to God, in which case it is always prayer or praise
spoken to God but in the hearing of the entire congregation for encouragement
and consolation. Another school of thought believes that the gift of tongues
can be prophetic, in which case the believer delivers a "message in
tongues"—a prophetic utterance given under the influence of the Holy
Spirit—to a congregation. Whether prophetic or not, however, Pentecostals are
agreed that all public utterances in an unknown tongue must be interpreted in
the language of the gathered Christians. This is accomplished by the gift of
interpretation, and this gift can be exercised by the same individual who first
delivered the message (if he or she possesses the gift of interpretation) or by
another individual who possesses the required gift. If a person with the gift
of tongues is not sure that a person with the gift of interpretation is present
and is unable to interpret the utterance him or herself, then the person should
not speak. Pentecostals teach that those with the gift of tongues should pray
for the gift of interpretation. Pentecostals do not require that an
interpretation be a literal word-for-word translation of a glossolalic
utterance. Rather, as the word "interpretation" implies, Pentecostals expect
only an accurate explanation of the utterance's meaning. Besides the gift of
tongues, Pentecostals may also use glossolalia as a form of praise and worship
in corporate settings. Pentecostals in a church service may pray aloud in
tongues while others pray simultaneously in the common language of the gathered
Christians. This use of glossolalia is seen as an acceptable form of prayer and
therefore requires no interpretation. Congregations may also corporately sing
in tongues, a phenomenon known as singing in the Spirit. Speaking in tongues is
not universal among Pentecostal Christians. In 2006, a 10-country survey by the
Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life found that 49 percent of Pentecostals in
the United States, 50 percent in Brazil, 41 percent in South Africa, and 54
percent in India said they "never" speak or pray in tongues. Power gifts. The
gifts of power are distinct from the vocal gifts in that they do not involve
utterance. Included in this category are the gift of faith, gifts of healing,
and the gift of miracles. The gift of faith (sometimes called "special" faith)
is different from "saving faith" and normal Christian faith in its degree and
application. This type of faith is a manifestation of the Spirit granted only
to certain individuals "in times of special crisis or opportunity" and endues
them with "a divine certainty ... that triumphs over everything". It is
sometimes called the "faith of miracles" and is fundamental to the operation of
the other two power gifts. Worship. Traditional Pentecostal worship has been
described as a "gestalt made up of prayer, singing, sermon, the operation of
the gifts of the Spirit, altar intercession, offering, announcements,
testimonies, musical specials, Scripture reading, and occasionally the Lord's
supper". Russell P. Spittler identified five values that govern Pentecostal
spirituality. The first was individual experience, which emphasizes the Holy
Spirit's personal work in the life of the believer. Second was orality, a
feature that might explain Pentecostalism's success in evangelizing nonliterate
cultures. The third was spontaneity; members of Pentecostal congregations are
expected to follow the leading of the Holy Spirit, sometimes resulting in
unpredictable services. This was especially true in the movement's earlier
history, when anyone could initiate a song, chorus, or spiritual gift. Even as
Pentecostalism became more organized and formal, with more control exerted over
services, the concept of spontaneity retained an important place within the
movement and continues to inform stereotypical imagery, such as the derogatory
"holy roller". The phrase "Quench not the Spirit", derived from 1 Thessalonians
5:19, is used commonly and captures the thought behind Pentecostal spontaneity.
The fourth value governing Pentecostal spirituality was "otherworldliness" or
asceticism, which was partly informed by Pentecostal eschatology. The final and
fifth value was a commitment to biblical authority, and many of the distinctive
practices of Pentecostals are derived from a literal reading of scripture.
Prayer plays an important role in Pentecostal worship. Collective oral prayer,
whether glossolalic or in the vernacular or a mix of both, is common. While
praying, individuals may lay hands on a person in need of prayer, or they may
raise their hands in response to biblical commands (1 Timothy 2:8). The raising
of hands (which itself is a revival of the ancient orans posture) is an example
of some Pentecostal worship practices that have been widely adopted by the
larger Christian world. Pentecostal musical and liturgical practice have also
played an influential role in shaping contemporary worship trends, with
Pentecostal churches such as Hillsong Church being the leading producers of
congregational music. Several spontaneous practices have become characteristic
of Pentecostal worship. Being "slain in the Spirit" or "falling under the
power" is a form of prostration in which a person falls backwards, as if
fainting, while being prayed over. It is at times accompanied by glossolalic
prayer; at other times, the person is silent. It is believed by Pentecostals to
be caused by "an overwhelming experience of the presence of God", and
Pentecostals sometimes receive the baptism in the Holy Spirit in this posture.
Another spontaneous practice is "dancing in the Spirit". This is when a person
leaves their seat "spontaneously 'dancing' with eyes closed without bumping
into nearby persons or objects." It is explained as the worshipper becoming "so
enraptured with God's presence that the Spirit takes control of physical
motions as well as the spiritual and emotional being". Pentecostals derive
biblical precedent for dancing in worship from 2 Samuel 6, where David danced
before the Lord. A similar occurrence is often called "running the aisles". The
"Jericho march" (inspired by Book of Joshua 6:1-27) is a celebratory practice
occurring at times of high enthusiasm. Members of a congregation began to
spontaneously leave their seats and walk in the aisles inviting other members
as they go. Eventually, a full column is formed around the perimeter of the
meeting space as worshipers march with singing and loud shouts of praise and
jubilation. In some Pentecostal churches, these spontaneous expressions are
primarily found in revival meetings or special prayer meetings, being rare or
non-existent in the main services. Ordinances. Like other Christian churches,
Pentecostals believe that certain rituals or ceremonies were instituted as a
pattern and command by Jesus in the New Testament. Pentecostals commonly call
these ceremonies ordinances. Many Christians call these sacraments, but this
term is not generally used by Pentecostals as they do not see ordinances as
imparting grace. Instead the term sacerdotal ordinance is used to denote the
distinctive belief that grace is received directly from God by the congregant
with the officiant serving only to facilitate rather than acting as a conduit
or vicar. The ordinance of water baptism is an outward symbol of an inner
conversion that has already taken place. Therefore, most Pentecostal groups
practice believer's baptism by immersion. The majority of Pentecostals do not
view baptism as essential for salvation, and likewise, most Pentecostals are
Trinitarian and use the traditional Trinitarian baptismal formula. However,
Oneness Pentecostals view baptism as an essential and necessary part of the
salvation experience and, as non-Trinitarians, reject the use of the
traditional baptismal formula. For more information on Oneness Pentecostal
baptismal beliefs, see the following section on Statistics and denominations.
The ordinance of Holy Communion, or the Lord's Supper, is seen as a direct
command given by Jesus at the Last Supper, to be done in remembrance of him.
Pentecostal denominations reject the use of wine as part of communion, using
grape juice instead. Foot washing is also held as an ordinance by some
Pentecostals. It is considered an "ordinance of humility" because Jesus showed
humility when washing his disciples' feet in . Other Pentecostals do not
consider it an ordinance; however, they may still recognize spiritual value in
the practice. Statistics and denominations. In 1995, David Barrett estimated
there were 217 million "Denominational Pentecostals" throughout the world. In
2011, a Pew Forum study of global Christianity found that there were an
estimated 279 million classical Pentecostals, making 4 percent of the total
world population and 12.8 percent of the world's Christian population
Pentecostal. The study found "Historically pentecostal denominations" (a
category that did not include independent Pentecostal churches) to be the
largest Protestant denominational family. The largest percentage of
Pentecostals are found in Sub-Saharan Africa (44 percent), followed by the
Americas (37 percent) and Asia and the Pacific (16 percent). The movement is
enjoying its greatest surge today in the global South, which includes Africa,
Latin America, and most of Asia. There are 740 recognized Pentecostal
denominations, but the movement also has a significant number of independent
churches that are not organized into denominations. Among the over 700
Pentecostal denominations, 240 are classified as part of Wesleyan, Holiness, or
Methodistic Pentecostalism. Until 1910, Pentecostalism was universally Wesleyan
in doctrine, and Holiness Pentecostalism continues to predominate in the
Southern United States. Wesleyan Pentecostals teach that there are three crisis
experiences within a Christian's life: conversion, sanctification, and Spirit
baptism. They inherited the holiness movement's belief in entire
sanctification. According to Wesleyan Pentecostals, entire sanctification is a
definite event that occurs after salvation but before Spirit baptism. This
experience cleanses and enables the believer to live a life of personal
holiness. This personal cleansing prepares the believer to receive the baptism
in the Holy Spirit. Holiness Pentecostal denominations include the Church of
God in Christ, Church of God (Cleveland, Tennessee), and the International
Pentecostal Holiness Church. After William H. Durham began preaching his
Finished Work doctrine in 1910, many Pentecostals rejected the Wesleyan
doctrine of entire sanctification and began to teach that there were only two
definite crisis experiences in the life of a Christian: conversion and Spirit
baptism. These Baptistic, Reformed, or Finished Work Pentecostals teach that a
person is initially sanctified at the moment of conversion. After conversion,
the believer grows in grace through a lifelong process of progressive
sanctification. There are 390 denominations that adhere to the finished work
position. They include the Assemblies of God, the International Church of the
Foursquare Gospel, and the Open Bible Churches. The 1904-1905 Welsh Revival
laid the foundation for British Pentecostalism and especially for a distinct
family of denominations known as Apostolic Pentecostalism (not to be confused
with Oneness Pentecostalism). These Pentecostals are led by a hierarchy of
living apostles, prophets, and other charismatic offices. Apostolic
Pentecostals are found worldwide in 30 denominations, including the Apostolic
Church based in the United Kingdom. There are 80 Pentecostal denominations that
are classified as Jesus' Name or Oneness Pentecostalism (often self identifying
as "Apostolic Pentecostals"). These differ from the rest of Pentecostalism in
several significant ways. Oneness Pentecostals reject the doctrine of the
Trinity. They do not describe God as three persons but rather as three
manifestations of the one living God. Oneness Pentecostals practice Jesus' Name
Baptism—water baptisms performed in the name of Jesus Christ, rather than
that of the Trinity. Oneness Pentecostal adherents believe repentance, baptism
in Jesus' name, and Spirit baptism are all essential elements of the conversion
experience. Oneness Pentecostals hold that repentance is necessary before
baptism to make the ordinance valid, and receipt of the Holy Spirit manifested
by speaking in other tongues is necessary afterwards, to complete the work of
baptism. This differs from other Pentecostals, along with evangelical
Christians in general, who see only repentance and faith in Christ as essential
to salvation. This has resulted in Oneness believers being accused by some
(including other Pentecostals) of a "works-salvation" soteriology, a charge
they vehemently deny. Oneness Pentecostals insist that salvation comes by grace
through faith in Christ, coupled with obedience to his command to be "born of
water and of the Spirit"; hence, no good works or obedience to laws or rules
can save anyone. For them, baptism is not seen as a "work" but rather the
indispensable means that Jesus himself provided to come into his kingdom. The
major Oneness churches include the United Pentecostal Church International and
the Pentecostal Assemblies of the World. In addition to the denominational
Pentecostal churches, there are many Pentecostal churches that choose to exist
independently of denominational oversight. Some of these churches may be
doctrinally identical to the various Pentecostal denominations, while others
may adopt beliefs and practices that differ considerably from classical
Pentecostalism, such as Word of Faith teachings or Kingdom Now theology. Some
of these groups have been successful in utilizing the mass media, especially
television and radio, to spread their message. History. Background. The
charismatic experiences found in Pentecostalism have precedents in earlier
movements in Christianity. Church historian Dr. Curtis Ward proposes the
existence of an unbroken Pentecostal lineage from the early church to the
present, with glossolalia and gifts following. However, early Pentecostals
considered the movement a latter day restoration of the church's apostolic
power, and most historians of modern Pentecostalism write that the movement
emerged from late 19th century radical evangelical revival movements in America
and Great Britain. Within this radical evangelicalism, expressed most strongly
in the holiness and higher life movements, themes of restorationism,
premillennialism, faith healing, and greater attention on the person and work
of the Holy Spirit were central to emerging Pentecostalism. Evangelicals felt
that modern Christianity was missing the power and authority of the New
Testament church. Believing that the second coming of Christ was imminent, many
evangelicals expected an endtime revival that would bring many people to
Christ. Many leaders began to speak of an experience available to all
Christians which would empower believers to evangelize the world, often termed
"baptism with the Holy Spirit". The earliest Pentecostals understood their
movement historically within the framework of a "Latter Rain motif"—a
modified version of dispensationalism in which the return to prominence of the
charismata within the church was a sign of the imminence of Christ's Second
Coming. Certain Christian leaders and movements had important influences on
early Pentecostals. Albert Benjamin Simpson and his Christian and Missionary
Alliance was very influential in the early years of Pentecostalism, especially
on the development of the Assemblies of God. Another early influence on
Pentecostals was John Alexander Dowie and his Christian Catholic Apostolic
Church. The teachings of Simpson, Dowie, Adoniram Judson Gordon and Maria
Woodworth-Etter (she later joined the Pentecostal movement) on healing were
embraced by Pentecostals. Edward Irving's Catholic Apostolic Church also shared
many characteristics later found in the Pentecostal revival. There was no one
founder of modern Pentecostalism. Instead, isolated Christian groups were
experiencing charismatic phenemena such as divine healing and speaking in
tongues. The Wesleyan holiness movement provided a theological explanation for
what was happening to these Christians. They adapted Wesleyan soteriology to
accommodate their new understanding. Early revivals: 1900–1929. Charles
Parham, an independent holiness evangelist who believed strongly in divine
healing, was an important figure to the emergence of Pentecostalism as a
distinct Christian movement. In 1900, he started a school near Topeka, Kansas,
which he named Bethel Bible School. There he taught that speaking in tongues
was the scriptural evidence for the reception of the baptism with the Holy
Spirit. On January 1, 1901, after a watch night service, the students prayed
for and received the baptism with the Holy Spirit with the evidence of speaking
in tongues. Parham received this same experience sometime later and began
preaching it in all his services. Parham believed this was xenoglossia and that
missionaries would no longer need to study foreign languages. After 1901,
Parham closed his Topeka school and began a four year revival tour throughout
Kansas and Missouri. He taught that the baptism with the Holy Spirit was a
third experience, subsequent to conversion and sanctification. Sanctification
cleansed the believer, but Spirit baptism empowered for service. At about the
same time that Parham was spreading his doctrine of initial evidence in the
Midwestern United States, news of the Welsh Revival of 1904-1905 ignited
intense speculation among radical evangelicals around the world and
particularly in the United States of a coming move of the Spirit which would
renew the entire Christian Church. This revival saw thousands of conversions
and also exhibited speaking in tongues. In 1905, Parham moved to Houston,
Texas, where he started a Bible training school. One of his students was
William J. Seymour, a one-eyed black preacher. Seymour traveled to Los Angeles
where his preaching sparked the three-year-long Azusa Street Revival in 1906.
Worship at the racially integrated Azusa Mission featured an absence of any
order of service. People preached and testified as moved by the Spirit, spoke
and sung in tongues, and fell in the Spirit. The revival attracted both
religious and secular media attention, and thousands of visitors flocked to the
mission, carrying the "fire" back to their home churches. Despite the work of
various Wesleyan groups such as Parham's and D. L. Moody's revivals, the
beginning of the widespread Pentecostal movement in the United States is
generally considered to have begun with Seymour's Azusa Street Revival. The
crowds of blacks and whites worshiping together at Seymour's Azusa Street
Mission set the tone for much of the early Pentecostal movement. During the
period of 1906-1924, Pentecostals defied social norms of the time that called
for racial segregation and the enactment of Jim Crow laws. The Church of God in
Christ, the Church of God (Cleveland), the Pentecostal Holiness Church, and the
Pentecostal Assemblies of the World were all interracial denominations before
the 1920s. These groups, especially in the South, were under great pressure to
conform to segregation. Ultimately, North American Pentecostalism would divide
into white and black branches. Though it never entirely disappeared,
interracial worship within Pentecostalism would not reemerge as a widespread
practice until after the Civil Rights Movement. Women were vital to the early
Pentecostal movement. Believing that whoever received the Pentecostal
experience had the responsibility to use it towards the preparation for
Christ’s second coming, Pentecostal women held that the baptism in the Holy
Spirit gave them empowerment and justification to engage in activities
traditionally denied them. The first person at Parham’s Bible college to
receive Spirit baptism with the evidence of speaking in tongues was a woman,
Agnes Ozman. Women such as Florence Crawford, Ida Robinson, and Aimee Semple
McPherson founded new denominations, and many women served as pastors, co-
pastors, and missionaries. Women wrote religious songs, edited Pentecostal
papers, and taught and ran Bible schools. The unconventionally intense and
emotional environment generated in Pentecostal meetings dually promoted, and
was itself created by, other forms of participation such as personal testimony
and spontaneous prayer and singing. Women did not shy away from engaging in
this forum, and in the early movement the majority of converts and church-goers
were female. Nevertheless, there was considerable ambiguity surrounding the
role of women in the church. The subsiding of the early Pentecostal movement
allowed a socially more conservative approach to women to settle in, and, as a
result, female participation was channeled into more supportive and
traditionally accepted roles. Auxiliary women’s organizations were created to
focus women's talents on more traditional activities. Women also became much
more likely to be evangelists and missionaries than pastors. When they were
pastors, they often co-pastored with their husbands. The majority of early
Pentecostal denominations taught pacifism and adopted military service articles
that advocated conscientious objection. Spread and opposition. Azusa
participants returned to their homes carrying their new experience with them.
In many cases, whole churches were converted to the Pentecostal faith, but many
times Pentecostals were forced to establish new religious communities when
their experience was rejected by the established churches. Because speaking in
tongues was initially believed to always be actual foreign languages, it was
believed that missionaries would no longer have to learn the languages of the
peoples they evangelized because the Holy Spirit would provide whatever foreign
language was required. (When the majority of missionaries, to their
disappointment, learned that tongues speech was unintelligible on the mission
field, Pentecostal leaders were forced to modify their understanding of
tongues.) Thus, as the experience of speaking in tongues spread, a sense of the
immediacy of Christ's return took hold and that energy would be directed into
missionary and evangelistic activity. Early Pentecostals saw themselves as
outsiders from mainstream society, dedicated solely to preparing the way for
Christ’s return. An associate of Seymour's, Florence Crawford, brought the
message to the Northwest, forming what would become the Apostolic Faith Church
by 1908. After 1907, Azusa participant William Howard Durham, pastor of the
North Avenue Mission in Chicago, returned to the Midwest to lay the groundwork
for the movement in that region. It was from Durham's church that future
leaders of the Pentecostal Assemblies of Canada would hear the Pentecostal
message. One of the most well known Pentecostal pioneers was Gaston B. Cashwell
(the "Apostle of Pentecost" to the South), whose evangelistic work led three
Southeastern holiness denominations into the new movement. International
visitors and Pentecostal missionaries would eventually export the revival to
other nations. The first foreign Pentecostal missionaries were A. G. Garr and
his wife, who were Spirit baptized at Azusa and traveled to India and later
Hong Kong. The Norwegian Methodist pastor T. B. Barratt was influenced by
Seymour during a tour of the United States. By December 1906, he had returned
to Europe and is credited with beginning the Pentecostal movement in Sweden,
Norway, Denmark, Germany, France and England. A notable convert of Barratt was
Alexander Boddy, the Anglican vicar of All Saints' in Sunderland, England, who
became a founder of British Pentecostalism. Other important converts of Barratt
were German minister Jonathan Paul who founded the first German Pentecostal
denomination (the Mülheim Association) and Lewi Pethrus, the Swedish Baptist
minister who founded the Swedish Pentecostal movement. Through Durham's
ministry, Italian immigrant Luigi Francescon received the Pentecostal
experience in 1907 and established Italian Pentecostal congregations in the
United States, Argentina, and Brazil. In 1908, Giacomo Lombardi led the first
Pentecostal services in Italy. In November 1910, two Swedish Pentecostal
missionaries arrived in Belem, Brazil and established what would become the
Assembleias de Deus (Assemblies of God of Brazil). In 1908, John G. Lake, a
follower of Alexander Dowie who had experienced Pentecostal Spirit baptism,
traveled to South Africa and founded what would become the Apostolic Faith
Mission of South Africa and the Zion Christian Church. As a result of this
missionary zeal, practically all Pentecostal denominations today trace their
historical roots to the Azusa Street Revival. The first generation of
Pentecostal believers faced immense criticism and ostracism from other
Christians, most vehemently from the holiness movement from which they
originated. Alma White, leader of the Pillar of Fire Church, wrote a book
against the movement titled "Demons and Tongues" in 1910. She called
Pentecostal tongues "satanic gibberish" and Pentecostal services "the climax of
demon worship". Famous holiness preacher W. B. Godbey characterized those at
Azusa Street as "Satan's preachers, jugglers, necromancers, enchanters,
magicians, and all sorts of mendicants". To Dr. G. Campbell Morgan,
Pentecostalism was "the last vomit of Satan", while Dr. R. A. Torrey thought it
was "emphatically not of God, and founded by a Sodomite". Ironically, the
Pentecostal Church of the Nazarene, one of the largest holiness groups, was
strongly opposed to the new Pentecostal movement. To avoid confusion, the
church changed its name in 1919 to the Church of the Nazarene. A. B. Simpson's
Christian and Missionary Alliance negotiated a compromise position unique for
the time. Simpson believed that Pentecostal tongues speaking was a legitimate
manifestation of the Holy Spirit, but he did not believe it was a necessary
evidence of Spirit baptism. This view on speaking in tongues ultimately led to
what became known as the "Alliance position" articulated by A. W. Tozer as
"seek not—forbid not". Early controversies. The first Pentecostal converts
were mainly derived from the holiness movement and adhered to a Wesleyan
understanding of sanctification as a definite, instantaneous experience and
"second work of grace". Problems with this view arose when large numbers of
converts entered the movement from non-Wesleyan backgrounds, especially from
Baptist churches. In 1910, William Durham of Chicago first articulated the
Finished Work, a doctrine which located sanctification at the moment of
salvation and held that after conversion the Christian would progressively grow
in grace in a lifelong process. This teaching polarized the Pentecostal
movement into two factions. The Wesleyan doctrine was strongest in the Southern
denominations, such as the Church of God (Cleveland), Church of God in Christ,
and the Pentecostal Holiness Church. The Finished Work, however, would
ultimately gain ascendancy among Pentecostals. After 1911, most new Pentecostal
denominations would adhere to Finished Work sanctification. In 1914, a group of
300 white Pentecostal ministers and laymen from all regions of the United
States gathered in Hot Springs, Arkansas, to create a new, national Pentecostal
fellowship—the General Council of the Assemblies of God. These white
ministers had been nominally affiliated with C. H. Mason's African-American
Church of God in Christ, but by 1911, many had become dissatisfied with the
existing arrangement. It adopted a congregational polity (whereas the COGIC and
other Southern groups were largely episcopal) and a Finished Work understanding
of sanctification. Thus, the creation of the Assemblies of God marked an
official end of Pentecostal doctrinal unity. It was also the end of the early
Pentecostal experiment with racial integration. The new Assemblies of God would
soon face a "new issue" which first emerged at a 1913 camp meeting. During a
baptism service, the speaker, R. E. McAlister, mentioned that the Apostles
baptized converts once in the name of Jesus Christ, and the words "Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost" were never used in baptism. This inspired Frank Ewart who
claimed to have received as a divine prophecy revealing a nontrinitarian
conception of God. Ewart believed that there was only one personality in the
Godhead—Jesus Christ. The terms "Father" and "Holy Ghost" were titles
designating different aspects of Christ. Those who had been baptized in the
Trinitarian fashion needed to submit to rebaptism in Jesus' name. Furthermore,
Ewart believed that Jesus' name baptism and the gift of tongues were essential
for salvation. Ewart and those who adopted his belief called themselves
"oneness" or "Jesus' Name" Pentecostals, but their opponents called them "Jesus
Only". Amid great controversy, the Assemblies of God rejected the Oneness
teaching, and a large amount of its churches and pastors were forced to
withdraw from the denomination in 1916. They organized their own Oneness
groups. Most of these joined Garfield T. Haywood, an African-American preacher
from Indianapolis, to form the Pentecostal Assemblies of the World. This church
maintained an interracial identity until 1924 when the white ministers withdrew
to form the Pentecostal Church, Incorporated. This church later merged with
another group forming the United Pentecostal Church International. 1930-1959.
While Pentecostals shared many basic assumptions with conservative Protestants,
the earliest Pentecostals were rejected by Fundamentalist Christians who
adhered to cessationism. In 1928, the World's Christian Fundamentals
Association labeled Pentecostalism "fanatical" and "unscriptural". By the early
1940s, this rejection of Pentecostals was giving way to a new cooperation
between them and leaders of the "new evangelicalism, and American Pentecostals
were involved in the founding of the 1942 National Association of Evangelicals.
Pentecostal denominations also began to interact with each other both on
national levels and international levels through the Pentecostal World
Fellowship, which was founded in 1947. Though Pentecostals began to find
acceptance among evangelicals in the 1940s, the previous decade was widely
viewed as a time of spiritual dryness, when healings and other miraculous
phenomena were perceived as being less prevalent than in earlier decades of the
movement. It was in this environment that the Latter Rain Movement, the most
important controversy to affect Pentecostalism since World War II, began in
North America and spread around the world in the late 1940s. Latter Rain
leaders taught the restoration of the fivefold ministry led by apostles. These
apostles were believed capable of imparting spiritual gifts through the laying
on of hands. There were prominent participants of the early Pentecostal
revivals, such as Stanley Frodsham and Lewi Pethrus, who endorsed the movement
citing similarities to early Pentecostalism. However, Pentecostal denominations
were critical of the movement and condemned many of its practices as
unscriptural. One reason for the conflict with the denominations was the
sectarianism of Latter Rain adherents. Many autonomous churches were birthed
out of the revival. A simultaneous development within Pentecostalism was the
postwar Healing Revival. Led by healing evangelists William Branham, Oral
Roberts, Gordon Lindsay, and T. L. Osborn, the Healing Revival developed a
following among non-Pentecostals as well as Pentecostals. Many of these non-
Pentecostals were baptized in the Holy Spirit through these ministries. The
Latter Rain and the Healing Revival influenced many leaders of the charismatic
movement of the 1960s and 1970s. 1960-present. Before the 1960s, most non-
Pentecostal Christians who experienced the Pentecostal baptism in the Holy
Spirit typically kept their experience a private matter or joined a Pentecostal
church afterward. The 1960s saw a new pattern develop where large numbers of
Spirit baptized Christians from mainline churches in the United States, Europe,
and other parts of the world chose to remain and work for spiritual renewal
within their traditional churches. This initially became known as New or Neo-
Pentecostalism (in contrast to the older classical Pentecostalism) but
eventually became known as the Charismatic Movement. While cautiously
supportive of the Charismatic Movement, the failure of Charismatics to embrace
traditional Pentecostal taboos on dancing, drinking alcohol, smoking, and
restrictions on dress and appearance initiated an identity crisis for classical
Pentecostals, who were forced to reexamine long held assumptions about what it
meant to be Spirit filled. The liberalizing influence of the Charismatic
Movement on classical Pentecostalism can be seen in the disappearance of many
of these taboos since the 1960s. Because of this, the cultural differences
between classical Pentecostals and charismatics have lessened overtime. The
1960s and later decades also saw the prominence of prosperity theology, the
Word of Faith movement, and televangelism increase. Many such ministries have
faced criticism both from within and without Pentecostalism for being
manipulative or driven by consumerism.
