Prem Rawat Prem Pal Singh Rawat (Hindi: प्रेम पाल सिंह
रावत; born 10 December 1957), also known as Maharaji and formerly known
as Guru Maharaj Ji and Balyogeshwar, teaches a meditation practice he calls
Knowledge. At the age of eight, Rawat succeeded his guru Hans Ji Maharaj, who
was also his father, as Satguru (True Master) to millions of Indian followers.
He gained further prominence when he traveled to the West at age 13 to spread
his message. His claimed ability to impart direct knowledge of God attracted a
great deal of interest from young adults, but he was ridiculed by the media for
his youth and his supposed divine status. By the end of 1973 Divine Light
Mission (Divya Sandesh Parishad) was active in 55 countries and tens of
thousands of followers had been initiated. When Rawat turned sixteen he took
administrative control of the American organisation and became more active in
guiding the movement. The following May he married against his mother's wishes,
which prompted her to disown him and appoint his eldest brother as head of the
Indian DLM. Rawat retained control of the movement outside India and later
abandoned the religious aspects of his teachings to make his message more
widely acceptable, replacing Divine Light Mission with Elan Vital. As his
following increased in the 80s and 90s, Rawat toured almost constantly. In 2001
he established "The Prem Rawat Foundation" to fund his work and humanitarian
efforts. His message is now distributed in more than 88 countries. The TV
series "Words of Peace" is transmitted via satellite and cable in six
continents. The core of Prem Rawat's teaching is that the individual’s need
for fulfillment can be satisfied by turning within to contact a constant source
of peace and joy. Rather than a body of dogma, he emphasizes a direct
experience of transcendence that he says is accessible through the meditation
techniques he teaches. History. 1960s. Rawat was born in Haridwar, northern
India, on 10 December 1957, the fourth and youngest son of guru Shri Hans Ji
Maharaj and his second wife, Jagat Janani Mata Shri Rajeshwari Devi. Rawat
attended St. Joseph's Academy elementary school in his hometown of Dehra Dun.
At the age of three he began speaking at his father's meetings, and at six his
father taught him the "techniques of Knowledge." His father died in 1966, and
during the customary 13 days of mourning his mother and senior officials of the
organization discussed the succession. Both his mother, Mata Ji, and eldest
brother, Satpal Rawat (known then as Bal Bhagwan Ji, and currently as Satpal
Maharaj), were suggested as potential successors, but before either could be
nominated, Rawat addressed the crowd of mourners, reminding them that their
master was immortal and was still among them. In response, his mother, brother
and the senior disciples accepted Rawat as their Satguru, bowed to his feet and
received his blessing. Previously known to his father's followers as Sant Ji,
Rawat now assumed the title "Guru Maharaj Ji" and was called "Balyogeshwar" by
others (roughly "born saint" or "born lord of Yogis") on account of his youth
and spiritual precocity. From that time, Rawat spent his weekends and school
holidays travelling as his father had, addressing audiences on the subject of
Knowledge and inner peace. Because of his youth, effective control of the DLM
was shared by the whole family. During the 1960s, Westerners in India searching
for spiritual guidance met members of his father's Divine Light Mission and a
few became initiates or premies (from the Hindi "prem", meaning "love".)
British initiates invited him to visit the West, and in 1969 he sent one of his
closest Indian students (known as Mahatmas) to London to teach on his behalf.
In 1970, many of his new Western followers flew to India to see him, and were
present at India Gate, Delhi, when, still only twelve years old, he delivered
an address known as the "Peace Bomb," which marked the start of his
international work. 1970–1973. In 1971, Rawat travelled to the West against
his mother’s wishes. His first western address was given in June 1971 at the
first Glastonbury Fayre, he then went to Los Angeles, New York, Washington,
Canada and South Africa. His arrival in the United States was met with some
ridicule, as the teenaged Rawat was seen as immature and hence unfit to be a
religious leader. But he also created an extraordinary amount of interest among
young adults who were willing to examine his claimed ability to give a direct
experience of God. Many were attracted by the sense of joy, peace and
commitment shown by Rawat's followers. One witness said that Rawat "played the
whole time he was there ... he played with squirt guns, flashed pictures of
himself for all to see, and took movies of everybody ... Love flowed back and
forth between him and his devotees." Enthusiastic new members spread the
message that the 13-year-old Rawat could reveal God. He returned to India later
that year with 300 westerners, who chartered an Air India Boeing 747 to
accompany him and stayed in the mission's ashrams. Rawat took flying lessons
beginning when he was 13, and had begun training in a jet by age 15. In 1972
two Cessna airplanes were obtained for his use. Travelling almost constantly,
he was reported to have residences in London, New York, Colorado, California,
India, and Australia. The 1972 "Hans Jayanti", an annual festival celebrating
the birthday of Rawat's guru was attended by over 500,000 people. Six Jumbo
jets were chartered by American followers who paid extra so that South
Americans could fly from New York to India for free. Other countries made
similar arrangements to help the less financially able. On arrival, Indian
customs impounded a suitcase containing cash, jewelry and wristwatches worth
between US$27,000 and $80,000 which they said had not been properly declared.
Rawat said, "It has nothing to do with me, it is an attempt to harm the Divine
Light Mission. When someone grows, others get jealous of him, and the Divine
Light Mission has just blasted like an atomic bomb all over the world.” A DLM
spokesman said that the money had been pooled by 3,000 followers to cover
expenses, and that the valuables were gifts. The finances of Rawat and the DLM
in India and overseas were investigated by the Indian government. In June 1973
the investigation was still under way, and Rawat had to post a $13,300 bond in
order to leave the country. Charges were never filed, and the Indian government
later issued an apology. A reporter who attended an event in Boston in August
1973 which drew 9,000 attendees wrote that Rawat appeared humble and human, and
seemed to intentionally undercut the claims of divinity made by followers.
Sociologist James Downton said that from his beginnings Rawat appealed to his
followers to give up concepts and beliefs that might impede them from fully
experiencing the Knowledge (or life force), but this did not prevent them from
adopting a fairly rigid set of ideas about his divinity, and to project
millennial preconceptions onto him and the movement. Followers stressed "love,
peace and happiness" in their lives, but public attitudes were often
unsympathetic. Sociologist Stephen A. Kent wrote that as a 22-year-old hippie,
he found Rawat's message to be banal and poorly delivered, though his
companions spoke about it glowingly. In August 1973 while Rawat was in Detroit
to receive an award, he was slapped in the face with a shaving cream pie by Pat
Halley, a radical journalist. Rawat said that he did not want his attacker
arrested or hurt, but Halley was himself attacked a few days later and
seriously injured. When local members heard of the incident they notified Rawat
who requested that DLM conduct a full investigation. Two followers were
identified as the assailants and the police were immediately notified but the
Detroit police declined to initiate extradition proceedings. There was
speculation that the lack of action by the Detroit police may have been
connected with Halley's radical politics. Rawat's publicity campaign was
unparalleled. One journalist reported,  A tour of US cities was cut short in
early September 1973, when Rawat was hospitalized with an intestinal ulcer. His
personal physician said that his body, weakened by the pace of continual
travel, showed the stresses of a middle-aged executive. The "Hans Jayanti" of
1973, which was named "Millennium '73", was held in the Houston Astrodome.
Press releases said that the event would mark the beginning of "a thousand
years of peace for people who want peace." The main organizers were Rawat's
eldest brother Satpal and activist Rennie Davis, who predicted an attendance of
100,000 or more. The event attracted only about 20,000. It was not covered by
the national television news, although it received extensive coverage in the
print media and was depicted in the award-winning US documentary "Lord of the
Universe". The premies were described as "cheerful, friendly and unruffled" and
seeming "nourished by their faith". To the 400 premie parents who attended,
Rawat was "a rehabilitator of prodigal sons and daughters", though some
reporters found "a confused jumble of inarticulately expressed ideas." The
event was called the "youth culture event of the year". The failure of the
event to meet expectations hurt the Divine Light Mission and left it heavily in
debt, forcing changes within the movement. By 1976, the DLM was able to reduce
the debt to $80,000. According to Thomas Pilarzyk, the Millennium economic
deficit was partly the result of poor management by the "holy family" (Rawat's
mother and three older brothers), and partly the much lower than anticipated
attendance. Because of Prem Rawat's youth, his mother, Mata Ji, and eldest
brother, Satpal, managed the affairs of the worldwide DLM. When Rawat reached
sixteen years of age he wanted to take a more active part in guiding the
movement. According to the sociologist James V. Downton, this meant he "had to
encroach on his mother's territory and, given the fact that she was accustomed
to having control, a fight was inevitable". In December 1973, Rawat took
administrative control of the Mission's US branch, and his mother and Satpal
returned to India. By the end of 1973, the DLM was active in 55 countries. Tens
of thousands had been initiated, and several hundred centers and dozens of
ashrams formed. 1973 has been called the "peak of the Mission's success".
Rawat's affluent lifestyle was a source of controversy in the early 1970s. Some
media reports said that Rawat "lived more like a king than a Messiah". Critics
said that his lifestyle was supported by the donations of followers and that
the movement appeared to exist only to support Rawat's "opulent existence"."The
major focus of Maharaji is on stillness, peace, and contentment within the
individual, and his 'Knowledge' consists of the techniques to obtain them.
Knowledge, roughly translated, means the happiness of the true self-
understanding. Each individual should seek to comprehend his or her true self.
In turn, this brings a sense of well-being, joy, and harmony as one comes in
contact with one's "own nature." The Knowledge includes four meditation
procedures: Light, Music, Nectar and Word. The process of reaching the true
self within can only be achieved by the individual, but with the guidance and
help of a teacher. Hence, the movement seems to embrace aspects of world-
rejection and world-affirmation. The tens of thousands of followers in the West
do not see themselves as members of a religion, but the adherents of a system
of teachings that extol the goal of enjoying life to the full." Supporters said
there is no conflict between worldly and spiritual riches, and that Rawat did
not advise anyone to "abandon the material world", but said it is our
attachment to it that is wrong. Press reports listed expensive automobiles such
as Rolls-Royces, Mercedes-Benz limousines and sports cars, some of them gifts.
Rawat said, "I have something far more precious to give them than money and
material things – I give peace". "Maharaj Ji's luxuries are gifts from a
Western culture whose fruits are watches and Cadillacs," a spokesman said. Some
premies said that he did not want the gifts, but that people gave them out of
their love for him. They saw Rawat's lifestyle as an example of a "lila", or
divine play, which held a mirror to the "money-crazed and contraption-
collecting society" of the West. 1974–1983. In May 1974, a judge gave Rawat
his consent to marry without parental permission. His marriage to Marolyn
Johnson, a 24-year-old follower from San Diego, California, was celebrated at a
non-denominational church in Golden, Colorado. Rawat's mother, Mata Ji, had not
been invited. Rawat's marriage to a non-Indian finally severed his relationship
with his mother. She retained control of the Indian DLM and appointed Satpal as
its leader. Mata Ji said she was removing Rawat as Perfect Master because of
his "unspiritual" lifestyle and lack of respect for her wishes. Rawat retained
the support of the Western disciples. Most of the mahatmas either returned to
India or were dismissed. Rawat had become wealthy as a result of contributions
from his Western devotees, and led the life of an American millionaire. He ran
a household for his wife, his brother (Raja Ji) and his sister-in-law
(Claudia), and financed travel for the close officials and mahatmas who
accompanied him on his frequent trips around the globe to attend the Mission's
festivals. By early 1974 the number of full-time DLM staff had increased from
six to over one thousand. In November 1974, seeking more privacy for himself,
his wife and his entourage following security concerns, Rawat moved to a
property in Malibu, California. Purchased by the DLM for $400,000, the property
served as the DLM's West Coast headquarters. Controversy around a helipad on
the property was resolved by installing emergency water storage for the Los
Angeles County Fire Department and by limiting the number of permitted flights.
By 1976, most students viewed Rawat primarily as a spiritual teacher, guide and
inspiration. In January 1976 Rawat encouraged them to leave the ashrams and
discard Indian customs and terminology. He said that the organization had come
between his devotees and himself. He decentralized some decision making to
local premie communities, while he maintained his status as the ultimate
authority over spiritual and secular matters. The staff at the Denver
headquarters were reduced from 250 to 80. He described the managerial mentality
that had grown in the Mission as "only cosmetic and totally unnecessary. It's
like trying to take a cow and put lipstick on it. You can do it, but it's
unnecessary in practical terms". His appearance on 20 December 1976 in Atlantic
City, New Jersey, wearing a traditional Krishna costume for the first time
since 1975, signaled a resurgence of Indian influence and devotion. During
1977, many returned to "ashram" life, and there was a shift back from secular
tendencies towards ritual and messianic beliefs. In 1977 Rawat became a US
citizen. In October 1978, the hillsides surrounding Rawat's Malibu estate were
burned by a brushfire. His family and the DLM headquarters subsequently moved
to Miami Beach, Florida. The family, which grew to four children, returned to
Malibu in 1984. In 1980, Rawat removed all the "religious" aspects of the
movement and declared he now wanted "no movement whatsoever". The Hindu
references and religious parables that had been prominent in his teachings gave
way to a focus on the meditation techniques. Once called "Perfect Master",
Rawat abandoned his "almost divine status as guru" but affirmed his status as a
master. Scholars such as Kranenborg and Chryssides describe the departure from
divine connotations. In 1983 the Divine Light Mission was renamed Elan Vital
and Rawat closed the last western "ashrams", marking the end of his use of
Indian methods for international objectives. 1983–2000s. In the 1980s and
1990s as the number of Rawat's students grew he continued to tour extensively.
In one two year period he spoke at over 100 programs in 37 international
cities, including New York, London, Paris, Kuala Lumpur, Rome, Delhi, Sydney,
Tokyo, Caracas and Los Angeles. In 1990 there were said to be 1.2 million
followers worldwide, with 50,000 in the United States. 1999 saw the
commencement of regular satellite broadcasts to North America and other
countries. In 2001, Rawat founded The Prem Rawat Foundation (TPRF), a Public
Charitable Organization for the production and distribution of materials
promoting his message, and also for funding worldwide humanitarian efforts.
TPRF has provided food, water and medical help to war-torn and impoverished
areas. Between January 2004 and June 2005, Rawat delivered 117 addresses in
Asia, Europe, and North America focusing on a universal message of peace and
self-fulfillment. His message is currently distributed in eighty-eight
countries in print and on video, and his program "Words of Peace" is broadcast
on TV channels such as "Canal Infinito" in South America, "Channel 31" in
Australia, and "Dish Network" in the USA. Elan Vital states that the only
effective way of reaching out to the over 80 countries where his message is now
promoted is by leased private jet, which Rawat self-pilots, flying around a
quarter million miles a year. In 2007 during a two-month tour of India, Sri
Lanka and Nepal, Rawat spoke at 36 events, addressing over 800,000 people, and
by live satellite broadcasts reached an additional 2.25 million. A biography of
Rawat, "Peace is Possible", by Andrea Cagan, was published in 2006 with a
foreword by Emilio Colombo, a former President of the European Parliament and
former Prime Minister of Italy. In 2007 Rawat started the Peace Education
Program for inmates which, as of 2012, operates in 25 prisons across 10
countries. Michael Gilbert, UTSA associate professor of criminal justice,
stated that "The constructive changes in behavior among participants have been
noticed in our local Dominguez prison". In 2009, Rawat was made "Ambassador of
Peace" for the Basilicata region of Italy. In 2010, he spoke at the "Words of
Peace for Europe" conference in Brussels, at the invitation of European
Parliament Vice-President Gianni Pittella. In 2011, he again spoke in Brussels
at the conference, "Peace and Prosperity. Founding Values of the European
Union." In September, 2012, in Malaysia, Rawat was awarded the Asia Pacific
Brands Foundation Lifetime Achievement Award, "for his contributions in
championing and promoting global peace." Teachings. A number of scholars have
said that Rawat's teachings began in the North Indian Sant Mat or Radhasoami
tradition, which dismisses ritual and claims that true religion is a matter of
loving and surrendering to God who dwells in the heart. Geaves argues that this
is not quite correct; referring to Rawat's own statements about his lineage, he
places Rawat and his father within the tradition established by Totapuri, which
also gave rise to the Advait Mat movement. Geaves argues that while the
teachings within Totapuri's lineage have similarities with those of the
Radhasoami tradition and developed in the same geographical area, they are
nevertheless distinct. He adds that Rawat "is unusual in that he does not
consider his lineage to be significant and does not perceive his authority as
resting in a tradition." Prem Rawat claims that light, love, wisdom and clarity
exist within each individual, and that the meditation techniques which he
teaches, and which he learned from his teacher, are a way of accessing them.
These techniques are known as the 'Knowledge'. In his public talks he quotes
from Hindu, Muslim and Christian scriptures, but he relies on this inner
experience for his inspiration and guidance.Maharaj Ji meditation upon the
life-force. This meditation focuses on four types of mystical energy, known as
the experiences of Light, Harmony, Nectar, and the Word. These allow the
practitioner to develop a deep and spiritual self-knowledge"This Knowledge was
self-understanding, yielding calmness, peace, and contentment, since the
innermost self is identical with the divine. Knowledge is attained through
initiation, which provides four techniques that allow the practitioner to go
within.The major focus of Maharaji is on stillness, peace, and contentment
within the individual, and his 'Knowledge' consists of the techniques to obtain
them. Knowledge, roughly translated, means the happiness of the true self-
understanding. Each individual should seek to comprehend his or her true self,
which brings a sense of well-being, joy and harmony. The Knowledge includes
four meditation procedures: Light, Music, Nectar and Word. The process of
reaching the true self within can only be achieved by the individual, but with
the guidance and help of a teacher. Hence, the movement seems to embrace
aspects of world-rejection and world-affirmation. The tens of thousands of
followers in the West do not see themselves as members of a religion, but the
adherents of a system of teachings that extol the goal of enjoying life to the
full." Before they receive the Knowledge, Rawat asks practitioners to promise
to give it a fair chance and to stay in touch with him. He also asks that they
not reveal the techniques to anyone else, but allow others to prepare to
receive the experience for themselves. Rawat, who emphasizes a direct
experience of transcendence rather than a body of dogma, has been criticized
for a lack of intellectual content in his public discourses. Practitioners
describe Knowledge as internal and highly individual, with no associated social
structure, liturgy, ethical practices or articles of faith. According to
sociologist Alan E. Aldridge, Rawat says he offers practical ways to achieve
spiritual tranquillity that can be used by anyone. Aldridge writes that Rawat
originally aspired to bring about world peace, but now he places his attention
on helping individuals rather than society. Religious scholarship. George
Chryssides describes what Rawat terms 'Knowledge' as based on self-
understanding and an inner self, identical with the divine."Maharaji
progressively dissolved the Divine Light Mission, closing the ashrams,
affirming his own status as a master rather than a divine leader, and
emphasizing that the Knowledge is universal, non-Indian, in nature" [...] "This
Knowledge was self-understanding, yielding calmness, peace, and contentment,
since the innermost self is identical with the divine. Knowledge is attained
through initiation, which provides four techniques that allow the practitioner
to go within. James V. Downton, who studied Rawat's followers for five years in
the 70s, says "these young people had a spiritual experience which deeply
affected them and changed the course of their lives. It was an experience which
moved many to tears of joy, for they had found the answer they had been
seeking". Marc Galanter, a physician, and professor of Psychiatry and Director
of the Division of Alcoholism and Drug Abuse at the New York University Medical
Center, writes that "over the long term of membership, meditation also played
an important role in supporting a convert's continuing involvement. An analysis
of the relationship between the time members spent in meditation and the
decline in their level of neurotic distress revealed that greater meditation
time was associated with diminished neurotic distress". Ron Geaves, an expert
in comparative religions and a student of Prem Rawat, writes that Rawat, rather
than considering himself a charismatic leader, deemphasizes the sealing of the
master disciple relationship, and focuses on correct practice and staying in
touch through participation or listening. Stephen J. Hunt describes Rawat's
major focus as being on stillness, peace and contentment within the individual,
and his 'Knowledge' consists of the techniques to obtain them. Media coverage.
From Rawat's first travels in the West, he and his followers attracted media
attention. In an interview in "Der Spiegel" in 1973, Rawat said, "I have lost
confidence in newspapers. I talk with them this and the next day something
completely different is printed." In 1973, the Divine Light Mission's 50-member
public relations team concluded that Rawat's credibility had been compromised
by his youth, his physical appearance, and the Rolls Royce, as well as the
Detroit "pieing" incident and an allegation of smuggling (which was never
prosecuted). The head of the team said that they needed to get the public to
look past these factors to judge Rawat's credibility. Rawat has been termed a
cult leader in popular press reports, as well as anti-cult writings. Charisma
and leadership. J. Gordon Melton says Rawat's personal charisma was one of the
reasons for the rapid spread of his message among members of the 1960s
counterculture. Several scholars refer to Max Weber's classification of
authority when describing Rawat as a charismatic leader. Paul Schnabel
described Rawat as a pure example of a charismatic leader. He characterized
Rawat as materialistic, pampered and intellectually unremarkable compared to
Osho, but no less charismatic. Meredith McGuir, a professor of sociology and
anthropology sees formalization resulting from Rawat's desire to consolidate
his power and authority over the movement in the United States. Lucy DuPertuis,
a sociologist and one-time follower who assisted James V. Downton with his book
about the Divine Light Mission, described Rawat's role as a Master as emerging
from three interrelated phenomena: traditional or theological definitions of
"Satguru"; adherents' first-hand experiences of the Master; and communal
accounts and discussions of the Master among devotees. David G. Bromley
described the difficulty of a charismatic leader in proving to be above normal
human failings such as not to suffer ill health or indulge in worldly pursuits.
He presents Rawat's marriage as such a situation. Bromley described Prem Rawat
and other founders of new religions as being held in awe by their early
followers, who ascribe extraordinary powers to them that set them apart from
other human beings. Thomas Pilarzyk, a sociologist, wrote in a 1978 paper that
the distribution of power and authority in the DLM was officially based on the
charismatic appeal of Maharaj Ji, which he described as being somewhat
ambiguous, and that many followers were not certain about his position in the
organizational scheme of the movement, or the claim that he was the only true
spiritual master. Stephen J. Hunt said that in Rawat's case the notion of
spiritual growth is not derived — as is traditionally the case with other
gurus — from his personal charisma, but from the nature of his teachings and
the benefits to the individuals applying them. Ron Geaves says that Rawat is
not a renunciate, and that he has made great efforts to assert his humanity and
take apart the hagiography that has developed around him. Size and nature of
following. Estimates of the number of Rawat's adherents have varied widely over
time. Petersen states that Rawat claimed 7 million disciples worldwide in 1973,
with 60,000 in the US. Spencer J. Palmer and Roger R. Keller published a
general DLM membership of 1.2 million worldwide, with 50,000 in the US, in 1990
and 1997. Downton said by 1976 the vast majority of students viewed Rawat "as
their spiritual teacher, guide and inspiration". Quoting a student he had
studied, Downton said a typical view was that "the only thing he (Rawat) wants
is to see people living happily and harmoniously together". Downton concluded
that the students had changed in a positive way, "more peaceful, loving,
confident and appreciative of life". Former followers became known as "ex-
premies", and Elan Vital has characterised the vocal critics among them as
disgruntled former employees. Based on an analysis of Sophia Collier's "Soul
Rush", John Barbour, a professor of religion, concludes that Collier's
deconversion from DLM was uncharacteristic compared to other deconversions from
other movements, in that her deconversion brought her no emotional suffering.
Stephen Hunt writes that Western followers do not see themselves as members of
a religion, but rather as adherents of a system of teachings focused on the
goal of enjoying life to the full. According to Prem Rawat's official website,
in the eight years prior to May 2008, "Key Six session"s were attended by
365,237 people in 67 countries. These are the video sessions where the
techniques of Knowledge are taught by Rawat.
