Quranism Quranism ( Qur æƒÅniyoon) is a denomination of Islam that holds the
Qur'an to be the only canonical text in Islam. Quranists reject the religious
authority of Hadith, libraries compiled by later scholars who catalogued
narratives of what the Prophet Muhammad is reported to have said and done. This
is in contrast to mainstream Muslims who consider hadith essential for the
Islamic faith. Quranism is similar to movements in other religions such as
Karaite Judaism and the "Sola scriptura". History. This tradition has also been
recorded in Sahih Muslim (vol. 5, p.¬ 76, Kitab al-Nadhr). What is inferred
from Umar's words is that he believes the Quran is sufficient for guidance.
Thus, he might be regarded as the first person in Islam to express Quranism
beliefs. This conclusion is further supported by the historical claims that
during his rule, Umar banned the narration of the Prophets traditions and
hadiths. Etymology. Quranists may be referred to in various ways, for example
"Qur æƒÅniy≈´n" ( ') and ' () / ', both translating to "Quranites" (which is
also used in English), "Submitters", and usually by their opponents ' () (i.e.
"negators of Hadith" / "hadith rejectors"), or "Quranism", or "Quran aloner"s,
as well as other terms. Quranists may deride Sunni and Shia Muslims by
referring to them as 'hadithists' and 'hadith-followers'. Doctrine. Quranists
generally consider themselves to simply be "Muslims", a term directly from the
Quran. They do not think of themselves as belonging to a sect, like Sunni or
Shia, as they do not accept any of the narratives beside the Qur'an, thereby
universally rejecting the authoritative status applied to hadith by orthodox
Muslims as encoded in the various Sunnahs of the Sunni, Shia and other hadith-
following sects in Islam. The extent to which Quranists reject the authenticity
of the Sunnah varies, but the more established groups have thoroughly
criticised the authenticity of the hadith and refused it for many reasons, the
most prevalent being that hadith is not mentioned in the Quran as a source of
Islamic theology and practice, was not recorded in written form until more than
two centuries after the death of the prophet Muhammed, its perceived internal
errors and contradictions, and repudiate fatwas on a hadith's authenticity and
issues emanating from them. Because of a lack of authoritative clergy in
Quranism, ijtihad (independent reasoning) rather than institutionalised taqleed
(imitation) is the most common method in use by Quranists. Overview. Quranists
consider themselves to follow only the Quran. Liberal movements within Islam
include Quranists who interpret Islam as "a belief system committed to the
liberal values of a democratic world" under narrow Hudud (Arabic ÿ≠ÿØŸàÿØ).
Other quranists remain orthodox in their approach to human rights and broader
in the application of rules and punishments, supporting punishments such as
amputation of the hand for theft, crucifixion, amputation and execution of
enemies Most Quranists accept the same Arabic Quran used by other Muslims, with
only the minority 'submitter' sect reverting to what they claim is the original
Quran by removing ayats 9:128-9 to fit their 'Quran Code 19' theology. Quranist
groups are increasingly translating the Arabic Quran themselves into other
languages, because most translations by orthodox Muslim groups contain
perceived innovations and mistranslations to fit the orthodox ideology.
Orthodox Qurans are replete with bracketed comments ‚Äî based on the sunnah ‚Äî
throughout the ayats to lead the reader to interpret the Quran by the way of
the translator, even though the bracketed comments are absent from the Arabic
Quran, and such bracketed comments appear less frequently ‚Äî if at all ‚Äî in
Quranist translations. Some Muslims have suggested that the original
prohibition against Hadith led to the Golden Age of Islam, as the Quran was
able to stand up to critical thinking and questioning; and Muslims were thus
schooled to be inquisitive and seek answers to every quandary. They posit that
the increased reliance on Hadith, which was allegedly illogical and required
the suspension of disbelief, led to the eventual downfall of scholastic
pursuits in the religion. Notable. Syed Ahmed Khan (1817‚Äì1898) is often
considered the founder of the modernist movement within Islam, noted for his
application of "rational science" to the Quran and Hadith and his conclusion
that the Hadith were not legally binding on Muslims. His student, Chiragh
‚ÄòAli, went further, suggesting all the hadith were fabrications. Ahmed Subhy
Mansour is a recognised Islamic scholar and cleric, with expertise in Islamic
history, culture, theology, and politics. He founded a small group of
Quranists, but was exiled from Egypt and is now living in the United States as
a political refugee. One of his followers, Egyptian blogger Reda Abdel-Rahman
was freed on January 2009 after being detained for a year. Abdel-Rahman was
imprisoned for writing blogs that reject the sunnah and hadith, and claimed he
was tortured in order to reveal the password to his e-mail. Sheikh Mansour was
fired from Al-Azhar University after expressing his hadith rejector views. One
of Mansour's fellow Islamic scholars at Al Azhar University Sheik Jamal Tahir
took up the same Qur æƒÅniy≈´n stance. Edip Yuksel is a Turkish advocate for
the Qur æƒÅniy≈´n movement and has gained much attention through his books and
speeches. Mohammed Shahrour also rejects Hadith and has his own methods of
interpreting the Qur'an. Shabbir Ahmed is the author of ‚ÄúThe Qur‚Äôan As It
Explains Itself‚Äù, or QXP, a non-literal translation of the meaning of the
Qur'an in plain English. He interprets the meaning of the words and phrases in
Quran by comparing them to other instances where they are used elsewhere in the
Qur'an. The 1986 Malaysian book "" by Kassim Ahmad was met with controversy and
some scholars declared him an apostate from Islam for suggesting that "‚Äúthe
hadith are sectarian, anti-science, anti-reason and anti-women". His students
currently run a Qur æƒÅniy≈´n magazine. As many Quranists have a very
individualistic interpretation of the Qur'an, rejecting sectarianism and
organised religion as a general rule, it is difficult to gather an accurate
estimate of the number of Quranists in the world today by doing a study of the
Quranist organisations that exist. Another difficulty in determining their
prevalence is the possible fear of persecution due to being regarded as
apostates and therefore deserving of the death penalty by many traditional
scholars like Yousef Elbadry, Mahmoud Ashour, Mohammed Ra'fat Othman and
Mustafa Al-Shak'a. Maurice Bucaille and Non-Muslim scholars of Islam such as
John Esposito, Joseph Schacht and Cyrus Hamlin also criticise Hadith. Quranist
organisations and branches. The Ahle Qur'an. "Ahle Qur‚Äôan" is an organisation
formed by Abdullah Chakralawi, rely entirely on the chapters and verses of the
Qur‚Äôan. Chakralawi's position was that the Qur‚Äôan itself was the most
perfect source of tradition and could be exclusively followed. According to
Chakralawi, Muhammad could receive only one form of revelation (wahy), and that
was the Qur'an. He argues that the Qur'an was the only record of divine wisdom,
the only source of Muhammad's teachings, and that it superseded the entire
corpus of hadith, which came later. Ahle Quran scholars may use Tafsir when
pursuing the interpretations of the Quran. Tolu-e-Islam. Tolu-e-Islam
("Resurgence of Islam") is an organization based in Pakistan, with followers
throughout the world. The movement was initiated by Ghulam Ahmed Pervez, a
Qur'anic scholar. In his writings and speeches, he re-interpreted Qur'anic
verses with little or no emphasis on hadith. Tolu-e-Islam followers do not
reject all hadiths; however, they only accept hadiths which "are in accordance
with the Quran or do not stain the character of the Prophet or his companions".
The organization is loosely controlled. The organization publishes and
distributes books, pamphlets, and recordings of Pervez's teachings. United
Submitters International. Although different from other Quranists nowadays in
many ways, like having faith that Rashad Khalifa was the Messenger of the
Covenant mentioned in chapter 3 verse 81 and chapter 33 verse 7 of the Quran,
the term Quranists was closely associated with the late Rashad Khalifa, founder
of the United Submitters International. The group popularized the phrase: The
Qur'an, the whole Qur'an, and nothing but the Qur'an. After Khalifa declared
himself the Messenger of the Covenant, he was rejected by orthodox scholars as
an apostate of Islam. Later, he was assassinated in 1990 by a sunni terrorist
group. His followers believe that there is a mathematical structure in the
Qur'an, based on the number 19. Criticism. The most important criticism of
Quranist Muslims by the Orthodox establishment is that the Quran itself refers
to statements by the Prophet, and to other concepts that are not fully
explained within the Quran itself such as fasting, praying, and the hajj. There
are many verses that state references towards aspects that are not from the
Quran itself (historical references such as the situation and actions taken in
the time of Prophet Muhammad) which requires explanations from sources outside
of the Quran. The reference to the actions of Prophets are made throughout the
Quran such as: "Ye have indeed in the Messenger of Allah a beautiful pattern
(of conduct) for any one whose hope is in Allah and the Final Day, and who
engages much in the Praise of Allah. " [33:21] "Indeed All√¢h conferred a great
favour on the believers when He sent among them a Messenger (Muhammad) from
among themselves, reciting unto them His Verses (the Qur'√¢n), and purifying
them (from sins by their following him), and instructing them (in) the Book
(the Qur'√¢n) and Al¬≠-Hikmah wisdom and the Sunnah of the Prophet (i.e. his
legal ways, statements, acts of worship, etc.), while before that they had been
in manifest error." (3:164) Quranist Muslims are also criticized about how they
pick and choose which parts of the Quran they will adhere to. A simple problem
being on which verses (Ayah) someone may hold more emphasis on than others and
the issue of multiple belief systems within the same Quranist congregation.
Other simple criticism is the Quran was complied as one book after the death of
Muhammad by the 3rd Caliphate Uthman ibn Affan during the same time the that
hadith literature was being composed by the same scholars and passed unchanged
under different Caliphate throughout the Islamic history. Contemporary scholars
such as Gibril Haddad have commented on the apostatic nature of a wholesale
denial of the probativeness of the Sunnah according to Sunni Orthodoxy, writing
"it cannot be imagined that one reject the entire probativeness of the Sunna
and remain a Muslim". In his essay, "The Probativeness of the Sunna", Haddad
explains that the foundation of Islam is the Qur'an, which cannot be described
as God's word when one unconditionally rejects the probativeness of the Sunna
(since the fact that the Qur'an is God's Word was not established by other than
Muhammad's explicit statement that this was God's Word and His Book). As this
statement is part of the Sunna/Hadith Literature, to say that the Sunna is no
proof is no different than a denial of an integral part of the religion
according to Haddad. He also quotes from Yusuf ibn abd al-Barr, Ibn Hazm as
well as other renowned early traditional scholars such as al-Shafi'i, al-
Nawawi, Qadi Ayyad and Ibn Hajar. Answer to Quranist Rejection of Orthodox
Muslim Theology. "Asyhadu an la ilaha illa-allah wa asyhadu anna muhammadan
rasululu-allah" i. Those who denied completely that the Qur'an has ever
commanded to perform "syahada". They claimed that the Qur'an only told about
the phrase "laa ilaaha illa-allah" but never mentioned about the syahada part
"asyhadu". So, the only accepted "laa ilaaha illa-allah" and not "asyhadu an
...". ii. Those who admitted the first part "laa ilaaha illa-allah" but denied
the second part "muhammadun rasuulu-allah" with the same claim: It is not
mentioned by the Qur'an. In order to be able to understand how the Qur'an
asserted the meaning of syahadah as the fact we stated above, it is very
important to delve deeper into the ocean of Arabic language, the original
language in which the Qur'an was first revealed, and later transferred into
written manuscript. This also concludes that the root of the problem in the
inability to grasp the concept of the syahadah and other important Qur'anic
tenets has originated from very weak knowledge in Arabic. According to the
structural Arabic rule, sentences, which consist of other smaller sub-
grammatical structures are called "al-kalam" ( ÿßŸÑŸÉŸÑÿßŸÖ ) which originally
means "speech". However, this word was not only used to refer to some random
speech. In grammatical sense, it has another meaning, referring to any arranged
grammatical structures formed according to the rules determined by Arabic
grammar, forming a combination meaningful to the hearer (of the speech). The
most important keyword here is "meaningful", as a combination that does not
follow the grammatical rule will not give any meaningful element to the
audience, therefore it is not called as "al-kalam". The state of being
meaningful also moves this study into one more very important element of the
Arabic language, that is the semantical element (studies of meaning conveyed by
human speech). "I would love to take a bath after going to work". "I feel like
taking bath after finishing my work". 1. Muhammad goes to work by car. 2.
Muhammad goes to work. He goes by car. Using this fact as a base, the Qur'an
was revealed in Arabic and had the same characteristic as the example stated
above. We can see many different verses but emphasize an identical meaning,
either completely or almost. The same rule has been applied to the statement of
syahadah. In the Qur'an, Allah mentioned the syahadah in various forms. "And
your god is one God. There is no God except Him, the Entirely Merciful, the
Especially Merciful." ( al-Baqarah: 2/163 ) In this verse, in the phrase "Laa
ilaaha ilaa huwa", the singular pronoun "huwa" which translates into English as
"he" or "him" was used instead of the name "Allah", and it refers directly to
Allah. So, rather than "there is no God except Allah", "there is no God except
He" was used. Both have a completely identical meaning. Various verses which
used the same form are Taha: 20/8, Taha: 20/98, Ali 'Imran: 3/2, an-Naml: 20/
26, al-Muzammil: 73/9, at-Taghaabun: 64/13 and many more. "Muhammad is the
Messenger of Allah; and those with him are forceful against the disbelievers,
merciful among themselves." ( al-Fath: 48/29) "Allah witnesses that there is no
deity except Him, and so do the angels and those of knowledge - that He is
maintaining creation in justice. There is no deity except Him, the Exalted in
Might, the Wise." ( Ali 'Imran: 3: 18 ) In this verse, Allah clearly used the
word "syahida-allahu annahu laa ilaaha illa huwa" which means "Allah witnesses
that there is no God except Him". This asserts the validity to use "asyhadu" (I
witness) in place of it, because when Allah Himself witnesses that there is no
God except Him, it is completely logical for the believers to do so.
