Reincarnation research Reincarnation research is a branch of parapsychology
concerning reincarnation, specifically the study of "cases of the reincarnation
type", that is, cases in which a young child "spontaneously makes remarks about
a previous life he would have led before his birth", about a person with whom
the child identifies himself. Psychiatrist Ian Stevenson, from the University
of Virginia School of Medicine, investigated many reports of young children who
claimed to remember a past life. He conducted more than 2,500 case studies over
a period of 40 years and published twelve books, including "Twenty Cases
Suggestive of Reincarnation" and "Where Reincarnation and Biology Intersect".
Stevenson retired in 2002, and psychiatrist Jim B. Tucker took over his work
and wrote "Life Before Life". Other people who have undertaken research on
reincarnation include Satwant Pasricha, Godwin Samararatne, Antonia Mills, and
Erlendur Haraldsson. Research methods have involved analysis of childhood
memories, corresponding birthmarks, and psychological/cultural characteristics.
No line of research has conclusively demonstrated the existence of
reincarnation. Skeptics and the scientific community in general consider
reincarnation research to be pseudoscientific. Some parapsychologists advocate
developing protocols to guide, sort, compare, and evaluate cases studies.
Background. Reincarnation is the religious or philosophical concept that the
soul or spirit, after biological death, begins a new life in a new body that
may be human, animal or spiritual depending on the moral quality of the
previous life's actions. This doctrine is a central tenet of the Indian
religions and is a belief that was held by such historic figures as Pythagoras,
Plato and Socrates. Reincarnation is a central doctrine of the Kabbalah and is
accepted by Hasidim and other (although not all) adherents of Orthodox Judaism.
It is also a common belief of pagan religions such as Druidism, Spiritism,
Theosophy, and Eckankar and is found in many tribal societies around the world,
in places such as Siberia, West Africa, North America, and Australia. In recent
decades, many Europeans and North Americans have developed an interest in
reincarnation. Feature films, such as "Kundun", "What Dreams May Come" and
"Birth", contemporary books by authors such as Carol Bowman and Vicki
Mackenzie, as well as popular songs, regularly mention reincarnation.
Researchers. Several researchers are examining cases of early childhood past
life memories and birthmarks at the University of Virginia Division of
Perceptual Studies in the School of Medicine. Two of the best known researchers
at Virginia are the psychiatrists Jim B. Tucker (Bonner-Lowry Associate
Professor of Personality Studies) and Ian Stevenson (Professor of psychiatry
and head of the Division of Perceptual Studies until his retirement in 2002)
and between them they have published many books and dozens of research papers
in peer-reviewed journals. Other people who have undertaken research on
reincarnation include Satwant Pasricha, Antonia Mills, Godwin Samararatne,
Erlendur Haraldsson and H. H. Jürgen Keil. Pasricha is the head of the
Department of Clinical Psychology at the National Institute of Mental Health
and Neurosciences in India. In 2008, she wrote the book "Can the Mind Survive
Beyond Death?: Reincarnation Research". Mills is an anthropologist and
professor of First Nation Studies at University of Northern British Columbia,
specializing in First Nations peoples' reincarnation beliefs and cases. In
1994, she co-edited (with Richard Slobodin) "Amerindian Rebirth: Reincarnation
Belief Among North American Indians and Inuit". Haraldsson is Professor
Emeritus of psychology at the Faculty of social science at the University of
Iceland. Mills, Haraldsson and Keil conducted independent replication studies
of Stevenson's reincarnation research from 1987 to 1994 and subsequently
continued independent research in the field. Methods. Children's memories. Ian
Stevenson, a Canadian biochemist and professor of psychiatry, investigated many
reports of young children who claimed to remember a past life with events that
occurred during a previous life, ultimately conducting more than 2,500 case
studies over the course of his lifetime and publishing twelve books. Stevenson
undertook reincarnation research throughout the world, including North and
South America, Europe, Africa and Asia. According to Stevenson, childhood
memories ostensibly related to reincarnation normally occur between the ages of
three and seven years then fade shortly afterwards. He compared the memories
with reports of people known to the deceased, attempting to do so before any
contact between the child and the deceased's family had occurred. Stevenson
found that the vast majority of cases investigated involved people who had met
some sort of violent or untimely death. Corresponding birthmarks. Some 35
percent of the subjects examined by Stevenson had birthmarks or birth defects.
Stevenson reported that in the majority of these cases "the subject's marks or
defects correspond to injuries or illness experienced by the deceased person
who the subject remembers; and medical documents have confirmed this
correspondence in more than forty cases". Many of the birthmarks are not just
small discolourations. They are "often unusual in shape or size and are often
puckered or raised rather than simply being flat. Some can be quite dramatic
and unusual in appearance." Stevenson believed that the existence of birth
marks and deformities on children, when they occurred at the location of fatal
wounds in the deceased, provided the best evidence for reincarnation. and he
subsequently wrote "Reincarnation and Biology: A Contribution to the Etiology
of Birthmarks and Birth Defects". Psychological and cultural characteristics.
Erlendur Haraldsson and colleagues conducted several studies of the
personality, abilities and psychological characteristics of children who claim
memories of a previous life, comparing them with paired children who did not.
The objective of these studies was to determine the role certain psychological
characteristics the children might have as possible explanations for their
past-life memories, such as, fantasy, suggestibility, social isolation,
dissociation and attention seeking. In a study of 23 children pairs in Sri
Lanka, those claiming memories of a previous life had greater verbal skills and
better memory than their peers, performed much better in school, and were more
socially active, but were not more suggestible. In a further study of 27
children pairs in Sri Lanka, one evaluation checklist revealed that the target
children exhibited more behavioral problems, including oppositional traits, and
obsessional and perfectionistic characteristics, and a dissociation instrument
showed them to have dissociative tendencies such as rapid changes in
personality and frequent daydreaming. In a later study of 30 children pairs
from Lebanon, children claiming memories of a previous life tested higher for
daydreaming, attention seeking and dissociation but not for suggestibility and
social isolation. The level of dissociation was much lower than cases of
multiple personality and was not clinically relevant. There was some evidence
of post-traumatic stress disorder-like symptoms; eighty percent of the children
spoke of memories of a violent death, mostly from accidents but also war-
related deaths and murders. It is possible the repeated appearance of this
imagery serves as a stressor. Antonia Mills reported an on-going longitudinal
study of Hindu and Muslim children who reported memories of a previous life,
both with and without a shift in religion, from Hindu to Muslim or vice versa.
The objective is to evaluate the later effect of the children's experience as
young adults, how it impacts their attitude toward efforts at Hindu—Muslim
reconciliation, their integration in their communities, and whether they score
higher on dissociative and psychic experience scales than those who have no
such memories. These cases of a shift in religion are very rare. Reincarnation
is accepted as a reality by Hindus, yet most of the reported cases entail
someone who died violently and came back quickly. Muslims do not formally
accept reincarnation as a possibility, yet they report about as many cases of
children remembering a life in the "other" religion as do the Hindus.
Independent replication. Mills, Haraldsson and Keil conducted independent
studies of Stevenson and his colleague's cases and added several previously
unpublished cases. Their replications included 60 cases in Burma, Thailand and
Turkey by Keil, 25 cases in Sri Lanka by Haraldsson, and 38 cases in northern
India by Mills. Mills, Haraldsson and Keil concluded that in some of the cases
the children had no normal way of knowing about the person with whom they
identified themselves. They noted problem areas requiring further study. The
investigations of three independent researchers into reported claims of
reincarnation in five cultures in which such cases are reported suggests that
some children who identify themselves with a person about whom they have no way
of knowing. In these cases, the children apparently exhibit knowledge and
behavior appropriate to that person. Although cultural belief in the
possibility of reincarnation fosters such cases, and more research needs to be
done on the social construction of cases, belief itself does not appear to
account for the totality of the child's statements and behavior. Reviews. "Old
Souls: Scientific Evidence From Children Who Remember Previous Lives" is a non-
fiction book by journalist Tom Shroder. An editor at the "Washington Post",
Shroder traveled extensively with Ian Stevenson, as he conducted past life and
reincarnation research in Lebanon, India and the American South. While
Stevenson wrote extensively on his reincarnation studies, his work earned
limited circulation outside academia. At the outset, Shroder sees his role not
only as observer, but also as skeptic. But as his journey with Stevenson
progresses, Shroder finds it increasingly difficult to reject the possibility
of past lives. "Life Before Life: A Scientific Investigation of Children's
Memories of Previous Lives" is a 2005 book written by psychiatrist Jim B.
Tucker, which presents an overview of more than 40 years of reincarnation
research at the University of Virginia School of Medicine. "Life Before Life"
has been translated into ten languages and the foreword to the book is written
by Ian Stevenson. Psychiatrist Jim Tucker took over Stevenson's work on his
retirement in 2002. Tucker recognizes that none of the cases examined are
perfect, and "faulty memory by informants" is seen to be the "best normal
explanation for many of the cases" reviewed in the book. Tucker discusses this,
referring to several relevant studies which have been done, and argues that
there is no support for the conclusion that informants must be remembering
statements or events incorrectly. Tucker basically agrees with Ian Stevenson
who said "reincarnation is the best — even though not the only —
explanation for the stronger cases we have investigated". Paul Edwards, a
philosopher and skeptic, has analyzed many of accounts of reincarnation, and
called them anecdotal. while also suggesting that claims of evidence for
reincarnation originate from selective thinking and from the false memories
that often result from one's own belief system and basic fears, and thus cannot
be counted as empirical evidence. Research protocols. (1) whether it involves
birthmarks/defects that correspond to the supposed previous life; (2) the
strength of the statements made about the previous life; (3) the relevant
behaviours exhibited, as they relate to the previous life; and (4) an
evaluation of a possible connection between the child reporting a previous life
and the supposed previous life. Antonia Mills used the SOCS scale to re-
evaluate the case of Ajendra Singh Chauhan, then assessing what the score would
have been had Ajendra’s father not suspected that his son's statements
represented a case of reincarnation and had not asked him questions. Ajendra
made 12 statements spontaneously without questioning and a further 15
statements in response to his father's questions. The Ajendra case would have
had a SOCS score of 0 and would not have been "solved", had the father not
asked questions. As a result of the father's questions, the case was solved and
most of Ajendra's statements were verified with a total SOCS score of 31,
ranking high on the SOCS scale. This result shows how important parental
questioning can be in eliciting the information necessary for solving a case.
The case demonstrated the importance of having a written record of the
child’s statements before the case is solved, to prevent possible cultural
elaboration. In this case, after-the-fact embroidery was checked and was found
less accurate, as it has been found in other cases, than the child’s initial
statements.  Conclusions and criticism. Antonia Mills and Steven Lynn discussed
three explanations that have been offered by various researchers for
spontaneous childhood past-life experiences: A fourth explanation, that the
experiences are the result of deliberately fraudulent or unconsciously
motivated self-deception driven by a need for notoriety, self-aggrandizement or
confirmation of a belief in reincarnation, was felt by Mills and Lynn to be
neither a satisfactory nor plausible explanation for many of the most
impressive and thoroughly investigated cases. Stevenson never claimed that he
had proved the existence of reincarnation, and cautiously referred to his cases
as being "of the reincarnation type" or "suggestive of reincarnation". He
concluded that "reincarnation is the best — even though not the only —
explanation for the stronger cases we have investigated". Jim Tucker recognizes
that this may seem to be an "astounding statement" —- that "memories,
emotions and physical injuries can sometimes carry over from one life to the
next". However, he argues that this is no more astounding than many currently
accepted ideas in physics seemed to be when they were originally proposed.
Research on reincarnation has received a mixed response. His methodology was
criticized for providing no conclusive evidence for the existence of past
lives. In a book review criticizing one of Stevensons' books, the reviewer
raised the concern that many of Stevenson's examples were gathered in cultures
with pre-existing belief in reincarnation. In order to address this type of
concern, Stevenson wrote "European Cases of the Reincarnation Type" (2003)
which presented 40 cases he examined in Europe. Stevenson's obituary in the
"New York Times" stated: "Spurned by most academic scientists, Dr. Stevenson
was to his supporters a misunderstood genius, bravely pushing the boundaries of
science. To his detractors, he was earnest, dogged but ultimately misguided,
led astray by gullibility, wishful thinking and a tendency to see science where
others saw superstition". In 2007, the "BMJ" said that Stevenson was a
"psychiatrist who researched reincarnation with scientific rigour". Deducing
from this research the conclusion that reincarnation is a proven fact has been
listed as an example of pseudoscience by skeptics. Carl Sagan and Arthur C.
Clarke felt that reincarnation research work fell short of providing proof of
reincarnation (which they both viewed as unlikely). Nevertheless, they felt
that further research was warranted. In "The Demon-Haunted World" (1996), Sagan
wrote that claims about reincarnation may have some experimental support,
however dubious and inconclusive. He said "at the time of writing, there are
three claims in the ESP field that deserve serious study", the third being
"young children sometimes report details of a previous life, which upon
checking turn out to be accurate and which they could not have known about in
any other way than reincarnation." Sagan further stated he picked the three
examples not because he thought them valid, but as examples of contentions that
might be true. Clarke observed that Stevenson had produced a number of studies
that were "hard to explain" conventionally, then noted that accepting
reincarnation raised the question of the means for personality transfer. To
date no physical process by which a personality could survive death and travel
to another body has been identified, which researchers such as Stevenson and
Tucker recognize as a limitation. Skeptic Sam Harris said of Stevenson "either
he is a victim of truly elaborate fraud, or something interesting is going on."
