Feminist theology Feminist theology is a movement found in several religions,
including Buddhism, Christianity, Judaism, and New Thought, to reconsider the
traditions, practices, scriptures, and theologies of those religions from a
feminist perspective. Some of the goals of feminist theology include increasing
the role of women among the clergy and religious authorities, reinterpreting
male-dominated imagery and language about God, determining women's place in
relation to career and motherhood, and studying images of women in the
religion's sacred texts and matriarchal religion. Methodology. Development of
Theology. According to Grenz and Olson in their review of Feminist Theology,
"it was developed in three distinct steps. They begin with a critique of the
past” such that they review the ways women have been oppressed; “they seek
alternative biblical and extrabiblical traditions that support” the ideals
Feminists are trying to advance; and finally “feminists set forth their own
unique method of theology, which includes the revisioning of Christian
categories.” Grenz and Olson also mention, however, while all feminists agree
there is a flaw in the system, there is disagreement over how far outside of
the Bible and the Christian tradition women are willing to go to seek support
for their ideals. Prehistoric religion and archaeology. The primacy of a
monotheistic or near-monotheistic "Great Goddess" is advocated by some modern
matriarchists as a female version of, preceding, or analogue to, the Abrahamic
God associated with the historical rise of monotheism in the Mediterranean Axis
Age. Mother Nature (sometimes known as "Mother Earth") is a common
representation of nature that focuses on the life-giving and nurturing features
of nature by embodying it in the form of the mother. Images of women
representing mother earth, and mother nature, are timeless. In prehistoric
times, goddesses were worshipped for their association with fertility,
fecundity, and agricultural bounty. Priestesses held dominion over aspects of
Incan, Assyrian, Babylonian, Slavonic, Roman, Greek, Indian, and Iroquoian
religions in the millennia prior to the inception of Patriarchal religion.
Gender and God. Others who practice feminist spirituality may instead adhere to
a feminist re-interpretation of Western monotheistic traditions. In those
cases, the notion of God as having a male gender is rejected, and God is not
referred to using male pronouns. Feminist spirituality may also object to
images of God that they perceive as authoritarian, parental, or disciplinarian,
instead emphasizing "maternal" attributes such as nurturing, acceptance, and
creativity. New Thought movement. New Thought as a movement had no single
origin, but was rather propelled along by a number of spiritual thinkers and
philosophers and emerged through a variety of religious denominations and
churches, particularly the Unity Church, Religious Science, and Church of
Divine Science. It was a feminist movement in that most of its teachers and
students were women; notable among the founders of the movement were Emma
Curtis Hopkins, known as the "teacher of teachers" Myrtle Fillmore, Malinda
Cramer, and Nona L. Brooks; with its churches and community centers mostly led
by women, from the 1880s to today. Within specific religions. Christianity.
Christian feminism is an aspect of feminist theology which seeks to advance and
understand the equality of men and women morally, socially, spiritually, and in
leadership from a Christian perspective. Christian feminists argue that
contributions by women in that direction are necessary for a complete
understanding of Christianity. Christian feminists believe that God does not
discriminate on the basis of biologically-determined characteristics such as
sex and race. Their major issues include the ordination of women, male
dominance in Christian marriage, recognition of equal spiritual and moral
abilities, reproductive rights, and the search for a feminine or gender-
transcendent divine. Christian feminists often draw on the teachings of other
religions and ideologies in addition to biblical evidence. Two authors whose
works are vital to an understanding of feminist theology are Mary Daly and
Rosemary Radford Ruether. Mary Daly grew up an Irish Catholic and all of her
education was received through Catholic schools. She has three doctorate
degrees. One from St. Mary’s College in sacred theology, and two from
University of Fribourg, Switzerland in theology and philosophy. From 1966 till
the end of her career she taught at Boston College. While in her early works
Daly expressed a desire to reform Christianity from the inside, she would later
come to the same point as several other feminists, that Christianity is not
able to enact the necessary changes as it is. (Prologue Daly). “On November
14, 1971, when she was invited to be the first woman to preach at Harvard
Memorial Chapel. She used the opportunity to denounce Christianity as
irredeemable for women and to call for women (and men) to make an exodus from
the Church. Almost all the women who attended this service walked out with her,
as well as a few men.” Her works include: "The Church and the Second Sex"
(1968), "Beyond God the Father" (1973), "Gyn/ecology: The Metaethics of Radical
Feminism" (1978), "Pure Lust: Elemental Feminist Philosophy" (1984),
"Webster’s First Intergalactic Wickedary of the English Language" (1987), and
"Outercourse: The Be-Dazzling Voyage" (1992). According to Ford’s The Modern
Theologians, “Mary Daly has done more than anyone to clarify the problems
women have concerning the central core symbolism of Chrisianity, and its
effects on their self-understanding and their relationship to God.” Rosemary
Radford Ruether grew up Roman Catholic and attended Catholic schools through
her sophomore year of high school. She was a classics major at Scripps College,
worked for the Delta Ministry in 1965 and taught at Howard University School of
Religion from 1966 to 1976. She has also “been responsible for the production
of some twenty-two books…and at least five hundred articles.” “Rosemary
Ruether has written on the question of Christian credibility, with particular
attention to ecclesiology and its engagement with church-world conflicts;
Jewish-Christian relations…; politics and religion in America; and Feminism."
The term Christian egalitarianism is sometimes preferred by those advocating
gender equality and equity among Christians who do not wish to associate
themselves with the feminist movement. See also: Unity Church, Christian
Science, Christian theological praxis and Postmodern Christianity. Islam.
Islamic feminism is a form of feminism concerned with the role of women in
Islam. It aims for the full equality of all Muslims, regardless of gender, in
public and private life. Islamic feminists advocate women's rights, gender
equality, and social justice grounded in an Islamic framework. Although rooted
in Islam, the movement's pioneers have also utilised secular and European or
non-Muslim feminist discourses and recognise the role of Islamic feminism as
part of an integrated global feminist movement. Advocates of the movement seek
to highlight the deeply rooted teachings of equality in the Quran and encourage
a questioning of the patriarchal interpretation of Islamic teaching through the
Quran (holy book), "hadith" (sayings of Muhammad) and "sharia" (law) towards
the creation of a more equal and just society. Muslim majority countries have
produced more than seven female heads of state including Benazir Bhutto of
Pakistan, Mame Madior Boye of Senegal, Tansu Çiller of Turkey, Kaqusha Jashari
of Kosovo, Megawati Sukarnoputri of Indonesia and Bangladesh was the first
country in the world to have an elected female head-of-state follow another
which includes Khaleda Zia and Sheikh Hasina. Sikhism. In Sikhism women are
equal to men, see the verse from the Sikh scripture the Guru Granth Sahib "From
woman, man is born; within woman, man is conceived; to woman he is engaged and
married. Woman becomes his friend; through woman, the future generations come.
When his woman dies, he seeks another woman; to woman he is bound. So why call
her bad? From her, kings are born. From woman, woman is born; without woman,
there would be no one at all." — Guru Nanak Hinduism. Within Ancient
Hinduism, women have been held in equal honor as men. Manusmriti for example
states: "The society that provides respect and dignity to women flourishes with
nobility and prosperity. And a society that does not put women on such a high
pedestal has to face miseries and failures regardless of howsomuch noble deeds
they perform otherwise." Manusmrithi Chapter 3 Verse 56. Within the Vedas the
Hindu holy texts, Women were given the highest possible respect and equality.
The Vedic period was glorified by this tradition. Many rishis were women.
Indeed several of them authored many of the slokas in the Vedas. For instance,
in the Rigveda there is a list of women rishis. Some of them are: Ghosha,
Godha, Gargi, Vishwawra, Apala, Upanishad, Brahmjaya, Aditi, Indrani, Sarma,
Romsha, Maitreyi, Kathyayini, Urvashi, Lopamudra, Yami, Shashwati, Sri, Laksha
and many others. In the Vedic period women were free to enter into brahmacharya
just like men, and attain salvation. During Hindu marriage ceremonies the
following slokas are uttered by the grooms but, these days, their import little
understood or ever attempted to understand. "O bride! I accept your hand to
enhance our joint good fortune. I pray to you to accept me as your husband and
live with me until our old age. …" "Rigveda Samhita Part -4, sukta 85, sloka
9702" "O bride! May you be like the empress of your mother-in-law, father-in-
law, sisters-in-law and brothers-in-law (sisters and brothers of the groom).
May your writ run in your house." "Rigveda Samhita Part -4, sukta 85, sloka
9712" This beautifully lyrical sloka from the Atharvaveda clearly states that
the woman leads and the man follows: ""The Sun God follows the first
illuminated and enlightened goddess Usha (dawn) in the same manner as men
emulate and follow women." Athravaveda Samhita, Part 2, Kanda 27, sukta 107,
sloka 5705." Women were considered to be the embodiment of great virtue and
wisdom. Thus we have: "O bride! May the knowledge of the Vedas be in front of
you and behind you, in your centre and in your ends. May you conduct your life
after attaining the knowledge of the Vedas. May you be benevolent, the
harbinger of good fortune and health and live in great dignity and indeed
illuminate your husband's home." "Atharva Veda 14-1-64." Women were allowed
full freedom of worship."The wife should do agnihotra (yagna), sandhya (puja)
and all other daily religious rituals. If, for some reason, her husband is not
present, the woman alone has full rights to do yagna." Rigveda Samhita, part 1,
sukta 79, sloka 872. Moving on towards the Monotheistic era of Hinduism when
such ideals such as Shaivism and Vaishnavism, a specific deity for feministic
worship was bought about under the Shaktism branch. From a Hinduism point of
view women are equal in all measures to men in comparison. Judaism. Jewish
feminism is a movement that seeks to improve the religious, legal, and social
status of women within Judaism and to open up new opportunities for religious
experience and leadership for Jewish women. Feminist movements, with varying
approaches and successes, have opened up within all major branches of Judaism.
Neopaganism. Some currents of Neopaganism, in particular Wicca, have a
ditheistic concept of a single goddess and a single god, who in hieros gamos
represent a united whole. Polytheistic reconstructionists focus on
reconstructing polytheistic religions, including the various goddesses and
figures associated with indigenous cultures. The term "thealogy" is sometimes
used in the context of the Neopagan Goddess movement, a pun on theology and
"thea" θεά "goddess" intended to suggest a feminist approach to theism. The
Goddess movement is a loose grouping of social and religious phenomena growing
out of second-wave feminism, predominantly in North America, Western Europe,
Australia, and New Zealand in the 1970s, and the metaphysical community as
well. Spurred by the perception that women were not treated equitably in many
religions, some women turned to a Female Deity as more in tune with their
spiritual needs. Education in the Arts became a vehicle for the study of
humanitarian philosophers like David Hume at that time. A unifying theme of
this diverse movement is the femaleness of Deity (as opposed and contrasted to
a patriarchal God). Goddess beliefs take many forms: some people in the Goddess
movement recognize multiple goddesses; some also include gods; others honor
what they refer to as "the Goddess," which is not necessarily seen as
monotheistic, but is often understood to be an inclusive, encompassing term
incorporating many goddesses in many different cultures. The term "the Goddess"
may also be understood to include a multiplicity of ways to view deity
personified as female, or as a metaphor, or as a process. (Christ 1997, 2003)
The term "The Goddess" may also refer to the concept of The One Divine Power,
or the traditionally worshipped "Great Goddess" of ancient times. In the latter
part of the 20th century, feminism was influential in the rise of Neopaganism
in the United States, and particularly the Dianic tradition. Some feminists
find the worship of a goddess, rather than a god, to be consonant with their
views. Others are polytheists, and worship a number of goddesses. The
collective set of beliefs associated with this is sometimes known as thealogy
and sometimes referred to as the Goddess movement. See also Dianic Wicca.
