Religion and sexuality Most world religions have sought to address the moral
issues that arise from people's sexuality in society and in human interactions.
Each major religion has developed moral codes covering issues of sexuality,
morality, ethics etc. These moral codes seek to regulate the situations which
can give rise to sexual interest and to influence people's sexual activities
and practices. Sexual morality has varied greatly over time and between
cultures. A society's sexual norms—standards of sexual conduct—can be
linked to religious beliefs, or social and environmental conditions, or all of
these. Sexuality and reproduction are fundamental elements in human interaction
and society worldwide. Furthermore, "sexual restrictions" is one of the
universals of culture peculiar to all human societies. Accordingly, most
religions have seen a need to address the question of a "proper" role for
sexuality in human interactions. Different religions have different codes of
sexual morality, which regulate sexual activity or assign normative values to
certain sexually charged actions or thoughts. Overview. The views of religions
and religious believers range widely, from giving sex and sexuality a rather
negative connotation, to the belief that sex is the highest expression of the
divine. Views on sexuality may not even be shared among adherents of a
particular sector. Some religions distinguish between sexual activities that
are practiced for biological reproduction (sometimes allowed only when in
formal marital status and at a certain age), and other activities practiced for
sexual pleasure, as immoral. Hebrew bible/Old Testament. While there was no
prohibition against premarital sex, children resulting from such liaisons were
considered fatherless ("orphans") and therefore could not inherit property.
Deuteronomistic code. "(Deuteronomistic code, Deuteronomy 12-26)" Covenant
code. "(Covenant code, Exodus 21–23)" Holiness code. "(Holiness code,
Leviticus 17–26)" Modern practice. Judaism and most Christian religions teach
chastity whether married or not. They also teach heterosexual monogamy.
Churches representing a minority of Christians permit monogamy with
homosexuals. Judaism. In the perspective of traditional Judaism, sex and
reproduction are the holiest of acts one can do, the act through which one can
imitate God, "The Creator", and in order to preserve its sanctity there are
many boundaries and guidelines. Within the boundaries, there are virtually no
outright strictures, and it is in fact obligatory. It prohibits sexual
relations outside of heterosexual marriage, maintains biblical strictures on
relations within marriage including observance of Niddah, a prohibition on
relations for a period including the menstrual period, and Tzniut, requirements
of modest dress and behavior. Traditional Judaism views adultery, incest, and
male/female homosexual acts as grave sins. See Jewish views of homosexuality.
Judaism permits relatively free divorce, with Orthodox Judaism and Conservative
Judaism requiring a religious divorce ceremony for a divorce to be religiously
recognized. More modern branches of Judaism have adapted perspectives more
consistent with contemporary general secular culture. Orthodox. There are
several levels to the observance of physical and personal modesty ("tzniut")
according to Orthodox Judaism as derived from various sources in "halakha".
Observance of these rules varies from aspirational to mandatory to routine
across the spectrum of Orthodox stricture and observance. Orthodox Judaism also
maintains a strong prohibition on interfaith sexual relations and marriage.
Orthodox Jews tend to have a lower intermarriage rate than their Conservative
and Reform counterparts. The 1990 National Jewish Population Survey indicated
that of all the Jewish denominations, Orthodox Jews alone had a lower
intermarriage rate in the 18-39 age category (3%) vs. the 40+ category (10%),
compared with 37% vs. 10% for Conservative Jews, 53% vs. 10% for Reform Jews,
and 72% vs. 39% for secular Jews. A Jerusalem Center for Public Affairs report
showed that Orthodox Judaism had doubled among synagogue-affiliated Jews in the
United States, from 10% in 1990 to 21.8% in 2001, and that most of this growth
was in the stricter Haredi Judaism as opposed to Modern Orthodox Judaism. It
speculated that this trend may have been related to a general trend towards
greater religious and social traditionalism, as well as due to earlier marriage
and higher birth rates in Orthodox families consistent with more traditional
sexual behavior. Orthodox Judaism, alone of all the Jewish denominations,
retains relatively mild traditional disabilities on divorce, including a
Biblical prohibition on a Kohen (priestly descendant of Aaron) marrying a
divorcee or a woman who has engaged in certain types of sexual misconduct.
These strictures, while observed, are generally regarded as matters of personal
status rather than morality. An Orthodox bill of divorce is required for a
divorce to be recognized. Conservative. Conservative Judaism, consistent with
its general view that Halakha (Jewish law) is a binding guide to Jewish life
but subject to periodic revision by the Rabbinate, has lifted a number of
strictures observed by Orthodox Judaism. In particular, in December 2006,
Conservative Judaism's Committee on Jewish Law and Standards adopted responsa
presenting diametrically opposed views on the issue of homosexuality. It
adopted an opinion restricting a prior prohibition on homosexual conduct to
male-male anal sex only, which it declared to be the only Biblical prohibition,
declaring all other prohibitions (e.g. male-male oral sex or lesbian sex)
rabbinic, and lifting all rabbinic restrictions based on its interpretation of
the Talmudic principle of Kevod HaBriyot ("human dignity"). While declining to
develop a form of religious gay marriage, it permitted blessing lesbian and gay
unions and ordaining openly lesbian and gay rabbis who agree not to engage in
male-male anal sex. It is also a traditionalist opinion, upholding all
traditional prohibitions on homosexual activity, also adopted as a majority
opinion, The approach permits individual rabbis, congregations, and rabbinical
schools to set their own policy on homosexual conduct. It reflects a profound
change from a prior blanket prohibition on male homosexual practices. It
acknowledges a sharp divergence of views on sexual matters within Conservative
Judaism, such that there is no single Conservative Jewish approach to matters
of sexuality. Conservative Judaism currently straddles the divide between
liberal and traditional opinion on sexual matters within contemporary American
society, permitting both views. The responsum enjoined young people not to be
"promiscuous" and to prepare themselves for "traditional marriage" if possible,
while not explicitly lifting or re-enforcing any express strictures on non-
marital heterosexual conduct. Even before this responsum, strictures on pre-
marital sex had been substantially ignored, even in official circles. For
example, when the Jewish Theological Seminary of America proposed enforcing a
policy against non-marital cohabitation by rabbinical students in the 1990s,
protests by cohabiting rabbinical students resulted in a complete rescission of
the policy. Conservative Judaism formally prohibits interfaith marriage and its
standards currently indicate it will expel a Rabbi who performs an interfaith
marriage. It maintains a variety of formal strictures including a prohibition
on making birth announcements in synagogue bulletins for children on non-Jewish
mothers and accepting non-Jewish individuals as synagogue members. However,
interfaith marriage is relatively widespread among the Conservative laity, and
the Conservative movement has recently adapted a policy of being more welcoming
of interfaith couples in the hopes of interesting their children in Judaism.
Conservative Judaism, which was for much of the 20th century the largest Jewish
denomination in the United States declined sharply in synagogue membership in
the United States the 1990s, from 51% of synagogue memberships in 1990 to 33.1%
in 2001, with most of the loss going to Orthodox Judaism and most of the rest
to Reform. The fracturing in American society of opinion between increasingly
liberal and increasingly traditionalist viewpoints on sexual and other issues,
as well as the gap between official opinion and general lay practice vis-a-vis
the more traditionalist and liberal denominations, may have contributed to the
decline. Reform, Reconstructionist and Humanistic. Reform Judaism, Humanistic
Judaism and Reconstructionist Judaism do not observe or require traditional
sexuality rules and have welcomed non married and homosexual couples and
endorsed homosexual commitment ceremonies and marriages. Reform and
Reconstructionist Judaism are more tolerant of interfaith marriage, and many
rabbis in both communities will perform one. Humanistic Judaism permits
interfaith marriage. Reform, Reconstructionist and Humanistic Judaism also do
not require a religious divorce ceremony separate from a civil divorce. It has
been speculated that the more tolerant attitudes of Reform, Reconstructionist
and Humanistic Judaism towards both sexual diversity and interfaith marriage
may have contributed to the rise in their popularity during the 1990s, from
about 33% of affiliated households to 38%, making it pass Conservative Judaism
as the largest Jewish denomination in the United States. Christianity.
Historical background. In early and ascetic Christianity, with expectation of
an imminent Armageddon, sex (procreation of children) was not highly
emphasized, and was considered by some "evil", while celibacy and virginity
were highly praised. Paul of Tarsus wrote in 1 Corinthians that "It is good for
unmarried to stay unmarried, but if they cannot control themselves, they should
marry, for it is better to marry than to burn with passion". Some have
suggested that Paul's treatment of sex was influenced by his conviction that
the end of the world was imminent. Under this view, Paul, believing that the
world would soon end, took it as a corollary that all earthly concerns,
including sex, should hold little interest for Christians. Paul's letters show
far greater concern with sexual issues than the gospel writers attributed to
Jesus, since Paul was building Christian communities over decades and
responding to various issues that arose. Paul did, however, support marriage,
and sex within marriage. He recognized that for married couples, sex is helpful
in protecting them with respect to their temptations and he recommends ongoing
sexual relations between spouses, even if their religious observances may
prompt them to abstain for a time. Importantly, Paul’s view of sex is also
that it is actually unnecessary for those with certain “gifts” (presumably
"celibacy"). From the beginning of the thirteenth century, the Catholic Church
formally recognized marriage between a freely consenting, baptized man and
woman as a sacrament—an outward sign communicating a special gift of God's
love. The Council of Florence in 1438 gave this definition, following earlier
Church statements in 1208, and declared that sexual union was a special
participation in the union of Christ in the Church. However the Puritans, while
highly valuing the institution, viewed marriage as a "civil", rather than a
"religious" matter, being "under the jurisdiction of the civil courts". This is
because they found no biblical precedent for clergy performing marriage
ceremonies. Further, marriage was said to be for the "relief of concupiscence"
as well as any spiritual purpose. During the Protestant Reformation, Martin
Luther and John Calvin denied the sacramentality of marriage. This unanimity
was broken at the 1930 Lambeth Conference, the quadrennial meeting of the
worldwide Anglican Communion—creating divisions in that denomination. Sex
before marriage was not a taboo in the Anglican Church until the "Hardwicke
Marriage Act of 1753, which for the first time stipulated that everyone in
England and Wales had to be married in their parish church" Prior to that time,
"marriage began at the time of betrothal, when couples would live and sleep
together... The process begun at the time of the Hardwicke Act continued
throughout the 1800s, with stigma beginning to attach to illegitimacy" [http://
news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/2296151.stm. After World War II, divergence in
Protestant teaching on sexuality accelerated. Today, progressive Christians in
a wide number of denominations advocate that the teachings against premarital
sex, divorce, and homosexuality have been either misread throughout previous
centuries or that they applied to ancient, and not current, circumstances.
Fundamentalist Christians tend to hold onto the idea that based on passages in
the Bible that condemn men laying with men and porneia that homosexuality and
premarital sex are sinful. However, some conservative Protestant Christians
have downplayed the importance of Bible verses that condemn remarriage after
divorce as adultery.() Scriptures in the New Testament dealing with sexuality
are extensive. Subjects include: the Apostolic Decree (), sexual immorality,
divine love (), mutual self-giving (), bodily membership between Christ and
between husband and wife () and honor versus dishonor of adultery.() Even with
the large number of Bible passages that address issues of sexuality,
interpretation of these verses can vary. The issue of premarital sex is good
example of how the same verse can be viewed in different ways. In modern
English, "fornication" typically refers to voluntary sexual intercourse between
persons not married to each other. Given that modern definition, a verse that
condemns fornication (such as which is often cited by various denominations as
biblical opposition to pre-marital sex) would appear to be clear. However, in
the New Testament, "fornication" is the word used to translate the Koine Greek
word "porneia" into English. In Ancient Greek, the word "porneia" meant
"illicit sex" or "illegal sex". Early Christians interpreted this word to
encompass activities such as: adultery, incest, and bestiality. Modern
evangelical Christians tend to prefer the definition of premarital sex, or will
even choose to broaden the term to also include activities such as
homosexuality, prostitution, masturbation and pornography, while progressive
Christians tend to limit the interpretation of the word to illegal sexual
activities such as incest, bestiality, and pedophilia. Protestantism and
Anglicanism. In most Lutheran, Reformed and United churches of the EKD in
Germany and in the Netherlands and Switzerland view homosexuality as a
violation of the 7th commandment. In these Lutheran, United and Reformed
churches (Luther/Calvin) gay ministers are not permitted in ministry and gay
couples are not allowed in their churches. Inside the Lutheran Church of
Sweden, the Bishop of Stockholm, Eva Brunne is a lesbian. In the Anglican
church there is a large discussion over the blessing of gay couples and over
tolerance of homosexuality. In some dioceses, Anglican (Episcopal) churches in
Canada and the USA permit openly gay priests in ministry and allow same-sex
blessings, which has drawn much criticism from other parts of the Anglican
Communion. Anglican churches in parts of Africa are extremely conservative in
their attitude towards homosexuality. Gay priests in most Anglican churches
must be celibate if they wish to continue their work as priests. While the
Unity Church at one point in its history offered prayers for the healing of
homosexuality, the church has consistently ordained openly gay ministers,
beginning with Ernest C. Wilson, who was ordained as a minister by founder
Charles Fillmore, who sent him to a church in Hollywood, California on learning
of his orientation. Most evangelical churches, such as Southern Baptists, for
example, interpret the Bible to say that homosexuality is a sin. Although
Leviticus calls for the killing of anyone who commits a homosexual act,
evangelicals believe that this was part of the Mosaic law. They point out that
in the new testament, , while it is still a sin, sinners have a chance for
forgiveness. The theme of Leviticus, death, is not echoed in this reading.
Catholic. The Catholic Church affirms the sanctity of human life, from
conception to natural death. The Church believes the human being has been
created in the "image and likeness of God", and that human life should not be
weighed against other values such as economy, convenience, personal
preferences, or social engineering. Therefore, the Church opposes activities
that they believe harmful or devalue divinely created life, including
euthanasia, eugenics, death penalty and abortion. The Church preaches that
Manichaeism is a heresy. Therefore, the Church does not preach that sex is
sinful or an impairment to a grace-filled life. "And God saw every thing that
he had made, and, behold, it was very good." then the human body and sex must
likewise be good. The Catechism teaches that "the flesh is the hinge of
salvation." However the Church does refer to sexual intercourse outside of
marriage is contrary to its purpose. The "conjugal act" aims at a deeply
personal unity, a unity that, beyond union in one flesh, leads to forming one
heart and soul" (Catechism 1643) since the marriage bond is to be a sign of the
love between God and humanity (Catechism 1617). Pope John Paul II's first major
teaching was on the Theology of the Body. Over the course of five years he
elucidated a vision of sex that was not only positive and affirming but was
about redemption, not condemnation. He taught that by understanding God's plan
for physical love we could understand "the meaning of the whole of existence,
the meaning of life." He taught that human beings were created by a loving God
for a purpose: to be loving persons who freely choose to love, to give
themselves as persons who express their self-giving through their bodies. Thus,
sexual intercourse between husband and wife is a symbol of their total mutual
self-donation. For John Paul II, "The body, and it alone, is capable of making
visible what is invisible: the spiritual and divine." He says there is no other
more perfect image of the unity and communion of God in mutual love than the
sexual act of a married couple, whereby they give themselves in a total
way—exclusively to one another, and up to end of their lives, and in a
fruitfully generous way by participating in the creation of new human beings.
Through this perspective, he understands the immorality of extra marital sex.
It falsifies the language of the human body, a language of total love worthy of
persons by using the body for selfish ends, thus treating persons and things
and objects, rather than dealing with embodied persons with the reverence and
love that incarnate spirits deserve. John Paul II stresses that there is great
beauty in sexual love when done in harmony with the human values of freely
chosen total commitment and self-giving. For him, this sexual love is a form of
worship, an experience of the sacred. The "Catechism of the Catholic Church"
indicates that sexual relationships in marriage as "a way of imitating in the
flesh the Creator's generosity and fecundity" and lists fornication as one of
the "Offenses Against Chastity" and calls it "an intrinsically and gravely
disordered action" because "use of the sexual faculty, for whatever reason,
outside of marriage is essentially contrary to its purpose." Islam. Few modern
Muslim countries have legal systems based fully on Islamic law (called
"shariah"), and an increasing number of Muslims do not look to shariah but to
the Quran itself for moral guidance. Islam encourages marriage as a form of
religious practice, and considers it as the best form that regulates the sexual
relationship of human beings. Qur'anic verses made it legal for Muslim men to
marry women from other Abrahamic religions (i.e. Jews and Christians), provided
that the women are faithful (adherent) to their own religious beliefs.
Contemporary scholars have upheld this ruling. A Muslim woman, on the other
hand, is only allowed to marry a Muslim man, one of the reasons being, to marry
a non-Muslim man would mean that the children would grow up as non-Muslims. A
marriage contract between a Muslim woman and a non-Muslim man is traditionally
considered illegal and void, and hence legally an adulterous affair. Another
reason is to insure that the woman's legal rights are fully recognized in a
marriage contract. 4:22 And marry not women whom your fathers married save for
what is past: it is shameful and odious—indeed an abominable custom. 4:23
Prohibited to you (For marriage) are: Your mothers, daughters, sisters;
father's sisters, Mother's sisters; brother's daughters, sister's daughters;
foster-mothers, foster-sisters; your wives' mothers; your stepdaughters under
your guardianship, born of your wives to whom ye have gone in,- no prohibition
if ye have not gone in; (Those who have been) wives of your sons proceeding
from your loins; and two sisters in wedlock at one and the same time save for
what is past; for God is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful. 4:24 Also (prohibited
are) women already married. Thus hath God ordained (Prohibitions) against you:
Except for these, all others are lawful, provided ye seek (them in marriage)
with gifts from your property: desiring chastity, not lust, seeing that ye
derive benefit from them, give them their dowers (at least) as prescribed; but
if, after a dower is prescribed, agree mutually (to vary it), there is no blame
on you. And God is All-Knowing, All-Wise. 4:25 If any of you have not the means
wherewith to wed free believing women, they may wed believing girls from among
those whom your right hands possess. And God hath full knowledge about your
faith. Ye are one from another: wed them with the leave of their owners, and
give them their dowers, according to what is reasonable. They should be chaste,
not lustful, nor taking paramours: when they are taken in wedlock, if they fall
into shame, their punishment is half that for free women. This (permission) is
for those among you who fear sin; but it is better for you that ye practice
self-restraint. And God is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful. 4:26 Allah doth wish
to make clear to you and to show you the ordinances of those before you; and
(He doth wish to) turn to you (In Mercy): And God is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
Most forms of sexual contact within a marriage are allowed. Sex is considered a
pleasurable, even spiritual activity, and a duty. At least one hadith
explicitly states that for a married couple to have sex is a good deed rewarded
by God. Another hadith suggests that a man should not leave the proverbial bed
until the woman is satisfied, a reference many say points to orgasm. Adultery
warrants severe punishment. Pre-marital sex is also considered sinful, albeit
less severe. All shari'a laws regulating sexual conduct apply to both men and
women equally, apart from those concerning menstruation. Forbidden sexual
contact includes genital contact with a woman while she is menstruating. In
such case, other sexual contact (such as kissing and any sexual activity that
does not include vaginal contact) is explicitly allowed. Temporary marriage
("Mut'a", marriage designated for a preset period of time) is not allowed by
the majority Sunni schools, but is allowed by Shia schools. Debate continues on
its validity. There are dissenting views on the topic of masturbation. While
some scholars consider it unlawful and thus prohibited according to Islamic
doctrine, others (such as those of the Hanbali doctrine) believe that those who
masturbate out of fear of committing fornication or fear for their bodies have
done nothing wrong and are not punished if (and only if) they are unable to
marry. According to some hadiths however, men are encouraged to fast in order
to avoid fornication and tempting oneself with sexual thoughts or conversations
with opposite sex outside marriage is strongly discouraged. The Quran clearly
disapproves of sodomy, but only one passage, sura 4:16, can be interpreted as
taking a particular legal position towards such activities: "As for the two of
you who are guilty thereof, punish them both; and if they repent and improve,
then let them be. Lo, Allah is relenting, merciful." The hadith (reports of
Muhammad's sayings and deeds from those close to him in his lifetime) are
inconsistent, some reporting that "inverts" were common in the Prophet's own
tribe and that he was much amused by their wit, while others recommend the
death penalty. Islamic law, or "shariah", distinguishes between "liwat"
(penetrative male-male sexual activity) and non-penetrative male same-sex
activity, the second being considered only a minor sin requiring chastisement.
Homosexual sodomy attracts the same penalties as adultery or fornication
(flogging or death), although the exact punishment varies with schools and
scholars. The position regarding male/female anal intercourse is not clear-cut
in Shia Islam. The majority of Shiite interpreters hold that (l) anal
intercourse, while strongly disliked, is not "haram" (forbidden) provided the
wife agrees, and (2), if the wife does not agree, then it is preferable to
refrain: "Woman is a means of your pleasure, therefore do not harm her." Sunni
Muslim disagree with that interpretation. Bahá'í faith. In the Bahá'í
Faith, sexual relationships are permitted only between a husband and wife.
Bahá'u'lláh, the founder of the Bahá'í Faith in his book of laws, the
Kitáb-i-Aqdas, forbid extramarital sexual intercourse. The Baha'i
understanding of sex is that chastity should be practised by both sexes before
marriage because it is commendable ethically and that it leads to a happy and
successful marital life. The Bahá'í Faith recognizes the value of the sex
impulse, but that its proper use is within the institution of marriage; Baha'is
do not believe in the suppression of the sex impulse but in its regulation and
control. Unitarian Universalism. While Unitarianism and Universalism are terms
used to express Christian theological ideas, since the 1950s it has changed to
be less focused on Scripture and the traditions of Christianity and started to
draw from a wider range of sources. Unitarian Universalists have advocated for
many decades for same-sex marriage. The Canadian Unitarian Council was given
Intervenor status to argue in support of same-sex marriage in the debates
before legalisation in 2005. The Unitarian Universalist Association and the
United Church of Christ partnered to create Our Whole Lives, a comprehensive
sexuality curricula that has modules from Kindergarten/Grade 1 through adult.
This program is an abstinence-based program that focuses on comprehensive
sexual education (as opposed to the abstinence-only programs often taught in
the United States). Unitarian Universalism advocates freedom for people to
choose which sexual acts are morally and personally permissible, and to express
one's sexual orientation and gender openly. The Reverend Debra Haffner, a
Unitarian Universalist minister, is co-founder and director of the Religious
Institute on Sexual Morality, Justice, and Healing, a multi-faith organization
promoting sexual health, education and justice in faith communities. The
Institute has become a major progressive voice on sexuality issues, and
Reverend Haffner completed an assessment of sexual health and responsibility
within the UUA. Hinduism. In Hinduism, views of sexual morality differ widely
depending on the tendence. Hindu scriptures themselves are often vague about
sexuality. There are temples depicting sexual activity openly (examples include
temple complexes at Ajanta and Ellora, and at Khajuraho, which has a group of
medieval Hindu and Jain temples, with their erotic sculpture), and sexual
imagery is not sacrilege, but sexual self-restraint (as well as in other
aspects of life) are considered essential to a Hindu's well being and dharmic/
karmic duties. Sexual variance was seen as a creative expression and was not
expressly discouraged: it was also encouraged as part of a human soul's need to
experience/comprehend the multifariousness that the world has to offer; but it
is deemed, as with any other worldly act, impermanent and imperfect compared to
the bliss of moksha. However, celibacy, sexual regulation and sexual abstinence
was recommended for those who would like a quicker, less complicated and proven
path to liberation. Note that any act of sex between consenting adults is not
inherently sinful: being attached to sex might merely delay your 'liberation';
in that sense sex is as much an impedance as amassing wealth, anger, attachment
to one's kin or any other worldly pursuits, including intellectual pursuits.
Religiously speaking, Hindus begin life at the Brahmacharya or "student" stage,
in which they are directed to chastely advance themselves educationally and
spiritually to prepare themselves for a life of furthering their dharma
(societal, occupational, parental, etc. duties) and karma (right earthly
actions); only once they reach the Grihastya or "householder" stage can they
seek kama (physical pleasure) and artha (worldly achievement, material
prosperity) through their vocations. Among more traditional elements of Hindu
society, such concepts as pre-marital sex are still anathema. The "Kama Sutra"
(Discourse on Kāma) by Vatsayana, widely believed to be just a manual for
sexual congress, offers an insight into sexual mores, ethics and societal rules
that were prevalent at that time (ca. 5 CE). Shrungara Ras (Romance, one of the
nine rasas or emotions). A drama in Sanskrit, Shakuntalam by Kalidasa, cited as
one of the best examples of Shrungara Ras, talks of the love story of Dushyanta
and Shakuntala. Buddhism. Buddhism does not go into details regarding what is
right and what is wrong within the activities of life. Details of accepted or
unaccepted human sexual conduct is not specifically mentioned in any of the
religious scriptures. The most common formulation of Buddhist ethics are the
Five Precepts and the Eightfold Path, which say that one should neither be
attached to nor crave sensual pleasure. These precepts take the form of
voluntary, personal undertakings, not divine mandate or instruction. The third
of the Five Precepts is "To refrain from committing sexual misconduct. However,
the "sexual misconduct" is such a broad term, and is subjected to
interpretation relative to the social norms of the followers. In fact, Buddhism
in its fundamental form, does not define what is right and what is wrong in
absolute terms for lay followers. Therefore the interpretation of what kinds of
sexual activity is acceptable for a layperson, is not a religious matter as far
as Buddhism is concerned. Buddhist monks and nuns of most traditions are
expected to refrain from all sexual activity and the Buddha is said to have
admonished his followers to avoid unchastity "as if it were a pit of burning
cinders." Neopaganism. Most Neopagan religions have the theme of fertility
(both physical and creative/spiritual) as central to their practices, and as
such encourage what they view as a healthy sex life, consensual sex between
adults, regardless of gender or age. Wicca, like other religions, has adherents
with a broad spectrum of views ranging from conservative to liberal. It is a
largely nondogmatic religion and has no prohibitions against sexual intercourse
outside of marriage or relationships between members of the same sex. The
religion's ethics are largely summed up by the Wiccan Rede: "An it harm none,
do as thou wilt", which is interpreted by many as allowing and endorsing
responsible sexual relationships of all varieties. Specifically in the Wiccan
tradition of modern witchcraft, one of the widely accepted pieces of Craft
liturgy, the Charge of the Goddess instructs that "...all acts of love and
pleasure are Goddess' rituals", giving validity to all forms of sexual activity
for Wiccan practitioners. In the Gardnerian and Alexandrian forms of Wicca, the
"Great Rite" is a sex ritual much like the hieros gamos, performed by a priest
and priestess who are believed to embody the Wiccan God and Goddess. The Great
Rite is almost always performed figuratively using the athame and chalice as
symbols of the penis and vagina. The literal form of the ritual is always
performed by consenting adults, by a couple who are already lovers and in
private. The Great Rite is not seen as an opportunity for casual sex. Most
Neopagan religions generally accept same-sex relationships as equal to
heterosexual ones; notable exceptions include the early writings of Gerald
Gardener, which are sometimes cited as homophobic, and some reconstructionists
regard same-sex relationships as second to heterosexuality. Homophobia is
considerably most-common amongst Germanic Neopaganism, though some are
outspoken advocates of civil rights for same-sex-loving persons, and as
homosexual or bisexual, themselves. Spread to non-adherents. Many cultures
attempt to codify their prescriptions concerning individual sexual behaviors.
Such codifications are frequently enacted as laws, extending their application
beyond the culture to other cultures under the purview of the laws, including
dissenters. Most of the Islamic world has strict rules enforced with sometimes
violent punishments to enforce Islamic moral codes, including sexual morality
on their citizens, and impose it on non-Muslims living within their societies.
The same was true of various European Christian regimes at some stages in
history, and some contemporary Christians support restrictions on the private
expression of sexuality outside of marriage, ranging from prohibitions of
prostitution to restrictions on oral sex and sodomy.
