Sathya Sai Baba ≈öri Sathya Sai Baba (born as Sathyanarayana Raju (23 November
192624 April 2011) was an Indian guru, spiritual figure, mystic, philanthropist
and educator. He claimed to be the reincarnation of Sai Baba of Shirdi who was
considered a spiritual saint and a miracle worker, whose teachings were an
eclectic blend of Hindu and Muslim beliefs, and who died in 1918. The
materializations of "vibhuti" (holy ash) and other small objects such as rings,
necklaces and watches by Sathya Sai Baba were a source of both fame and
controversy; devotees considered them signs of divinity, while skeptics viewed
them as simple conjuring tricks. Photos of Sathya Sai Baba are displayed in
millions of homes and on car dashboards. Lockets bearing his photo are worn by
many as a symbol of good fortune and are often kept in wallets for spiritual
protection. Sai Baba had ashrams in 126 countries and also ran a network of
hospitals, clinics and schools that were often free. Life. Early life and
proclamation. Almost everything known about Sathya Sai Baba's early life stems
from the hagiography that grew around him, the presentation of narratives that
hold special meaning to his devotees and are considered by them evidence of his
divine nature. According to his followers, then, Sathyanarayana Raju was born
to Easwaramma and Peddavenkama Raju Ratnakaram in the village of Puttaparthi,
in what was the Madras Presidency of British India. His birth, which his mother
Eswaramma asserted was by miraculous conception, was also said to be heralded
by miracles. His siblings included elder brother Ratnam Sesham Raju
(1921‚Äì1984), sister Venkamma (1923‚Äì1993), a second sister Parvathamma
(1928‚Äì1998), and younger brother Janakiramiah (1930‚Äì2003). As a child, he
was described as "unusually intelligent" and charitable, though not an
exceptional student, as his interests were more of a spiritual nature. He was
uncommonly talented in devotional music, dance and drama. He was said to be
capable of materialising objects such as food and sweets out of thin air. On 8
March 1940, while living with his elder brother Sesham Raju in Uravakonda, a
small town near Puttaparthi, Sathya was stung by a scorpion. He lost
consciousness for several hours and ithin the next few days there was a
noticeable change in Sathya's behavior. There were "symptoms of laughing and
weeping, eloquence and silence." "He began to sing Sanskrit verses, a language
of which he had no prior knowledge." Doctors believed his behavior to be
hysteria. His parents brought Sathya back home to Puttaparthi. Concerned, they
took him to many priests, "doctors" and exorcists. On 23 May 1940, Sathya
called household members and reportedly materialised "prasad" and flowers for
his family members. His father became furious at seeing this, thinking his son
was bewitched. He took a stick and threatened to beat him if Sathya did not
reveal who he really was. To this Sathya announced calmly and firmly "I am Sai
Baba", a reference to Sai Baba of Shirdi. He proclaimed himself to be a
reincarnation of Sai Baba of Shirdi‚Äîa saint who became famous in the late
19th and early 20th centuries in Maharashtra and had died eight years before
Sathya was born. Later activities and establishments. In 1944, a mandir
(temple) for Sathya Sai Baba's devotees was built near the village of
Puttaparthi. It is now referred to as the "old mandir". The construction of
Prashanthi Nilayam, the current ashram, began in 1948 and was completed in
1950. In 1957 Sathya Sai Baba went on a North Indian temple tour. In 1954,
Sathya Sai Baba established a small free General Hospital in the village of
Puttaparthi. In 1963, Sathya Sai Baba suffered a stroke and four severe heart
attacks. It is believed that he healed himself of these in front of the
thousands of people gathered in Prasanthi Nilayam praying for his recovery. On
recovering, Sai Baba gave a discourse announcing that he would be reborn as
Prema Sai Baba in the neighbouring state of Karnataka. He stated, "I am Siva-
Sakthi, born in the gotra (lineage) of Bharadwaja, according to a boon won by
that sage from Siva and Sakthi. Siva was born in the gotra of that sage as Sai
Baba of Shirdi; Siva and Sakthi have incarnated as Myself in his gotra now;
Sakthi alone will incarnate as the third Sai (Prema Sai Baba) in the same gotra
in Mandya district of Karnataka State." He stated he would be born again eight
years after his death at the age of 96. On 29 June 1968, Sathya Sai Baba made
his first and only trip overseas, to Kenya and Uganda. During a discourse in
Nairobi, Sathya Sai Baba stated, "I have come to light the lamp of Love in your
hearts, to see that it shines day by day with added luster. I have not come on
behalf of any exclusive religion. I have not come on a mission of publicity for
a sect or creed or cause, nor have I come to collect followers for a doctrine.
I have no plan to attract disciples or devotees into my fold or any fold. I
have come to tell you of this unitary faith, this spiritual principle, this
path of Love, this virtue of Love, this duty of Love, this obligation of Love."
In 1968, he established Dharmakshetra or Sathyam Mandir in Mumbai. In 1973, he
established Shivam Mandir in Hyderabad. On 19 January 1981, in Chennai, he
inaugurated the Sundaram Mandir. In a 1993 incident, four intruders armed with
knives entered his bedroom, either as an assassination attempt or as part of a
power struggle between his followers. Sai Baba escaped unharmed. During the
scuffle and the police response, the four intruders and two of Sai Baba's
attendants were killed. The official investigation left unanswered questions.
In March 1995, Sathya Sai Baba started a project to provide drinking water to
1.2 million people in the drought-prone Rayalaseema region in the Anantapur
district of Andhra Pradesh. In 2001 he established another free Super
Speciality hospital in Bangalore to benefit the poor. In April 1999 he
inaugurated the Ananda Nilayam Mandir in Madurai, Tamil Nadu. Old age, illness
and death. After 2004, Sai Baba used a wheelchair and his failing health forced
him to make fewer public appearances. In 2003, he suffered a fractured hip when
a student standing on an iron stool slipped and the boy and stool both fell on
him. After that he gave darshan from a car or his porte chair. On 28 March
2011, Sai Baba was admitted to the Sri Sathya Sai Super Speciality Hospital at
Prashantigram at Puttaparthi, following respiration-related problems. After
nearly a month of hospitalisation, during which his condition progressively
deteriorated, Sai Baba died on Sunday, 24 April at 7:40 IST, aged 85. Sai Baba
had predicted that he would die at age 96 and would remain healthy until then.
After he died, some devotees suggested that he might have been referring to
that many lunar years, rather than solar years, and using the Indian way of
accounting for age, which counts the year to come as part of the person's life.
Other devotees have spoken of his anticipated resurrection, reincarnation or
awakening. His body lay in state for two days and was buried with full state
honours on 27 April 2011. An estimated 500,000 people attended the burial,
among them the Indian Prime Minister, Manmohan Singh, Congress president Sonia
Gandhi, Gujarat Chief Minister Narendra Modi and Union Ministers S. M. Krishna
and Ambika Soni, as well as other political leaders and prominent figures.
Political leaders who offered their condolences included the Indian Prime
Minister Manmohan Singh. Sri Lankan President Mahinda Rajapaksa and the Dalai
Lama also offered condolences. Famous cricketer Sachin Tendulkar, whose
birthday was on that very day, cancelled his birthday celebrations. "The Hindu"
newspaper reported that "Sri Sathya Sai Baba's propagation of spiritualism and
preaching of Hindu philosophy never came in the way of his commitment to
secular beliefs." The Government of Karnataka declared 25 and 26 April as days
of mourning and Andhra Pradesh declared 25, 26 and 27 April as days of
mourning. Beliefs and practices of devotees. Sathya Sai Baba said that his
followers do not need to give up their original religion, saying
Internationally, Sathya Sai Baba devotees gather daily, or weekly on Sundays or
Thursdays or both, to sing group devotional songs, prayer, spiritual
meditation, service to the community (Seva), and to participate in "Education
in Human Values" (SSEHV) known as ""Bal Vikas"" (Blossoming of the Child), that
can also be described as Sai Sunday School. A primary aspect of Baba's
teachings is the spiritual benefit of "darshan" for his students. At that time,
Sai Baba might interact with people, accept letters, materialize and distribute
vibhuti (sacred ash) or call groups or individuals for interviews. Devotees
considered it a great privilege to have an interview and sometimes a single
person, group or family was invited for a private interview. Ashrams and
mandirs. Puttaparthi, where Sathya Sai Baba was born and lived, was originally
a small, remote South Indian village in Andhra Pradesh. Now there is an
extensive university complex, a speciality hospital, and two museums: the
"Sanathana Samskruti" or Eternal Heritage Museum, sometimes called the Museum
of All Religions, and the "Chaitanya Jyoti", devoted exclusively to the life
and teachings of Sathya Sai Baba; the latter has won several international
awards for its architectural design. There is also a planetarium, a railway
station, a hill-view stadium, an administrative building, an airport, an indoor
sports stadium and more. High-ranking Indian politicians such as the former
President Dr. A. P. J. Abdul Kalam, former Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee,
Andhra Pradesh former Chief Minister Konijeti Rosaiah and Karnataka Chief
Minister B. S. Yeddyurappa have been official guests at the ashram in
Puttaparthi. On Sathya Sai Baba's 80th birthday celebration, it was reported
that well over a million people attended, including 13,000 delegates from India
and 180 other countries. Sathya Sai Baba resided much of the time in his main
ashram called "Prashanthi Nilayam" (Abode of Highest Peace) at Puttaparthi. In
the hot summer he used to leave for his other ashram, called "Brindavan", in
Kadugodi, Whitefield, a town on the outskirts of Bangalore. Occasionally he
visited his Sai Shruti ashram in Kodaikanal. Sathya Sai Baba established three
primary mandirs (spiritual centres) in India. The first mandir, founded in
Mumbai in 1968, is referred to as either "Dharmakshetra" or "Sathyam". The
second centre, established in Hyderabad in 1973, is referred to as "Shivam".
The third centre, inaugurated on 19 January 1981 in Chennai, is referred to as
"Sundaram". Institutions, organisations and projects. Sathya Sai Baba supported
a variety of free educational institutions, hospitals, and other charitable
works in over 166 countries. Sri Sathya Sai University, of which Baba was the
Chancellor, has three campuses, one at Puttaparthi for men, one at Whitefield,
Bangalore for men and one at Anantapur for women. His charity supports an
institute for Indian classical music called the Sri Sathya Sai Mirpuri College
of Music. Baba's educational institutions aim to impart character education
along with excellence in academics with emphasis on human values and ethics.
Sathya Sai Baba chaired the Muddenahalli-Sathya Sai Loka Seva School and Sri
Sathya Sai Loka Seva Trust Educational Institutions in Muddenahalli-
Kanivenarayanapura regions. In addition, a Sathya Sai Baba University and
Medical School as well as a world class hospital and research institute are
being constructed on over to serve the destitute population. Baba said that the
campus will be modeled after Puttaparthi and will infuse spirituality with
academics. The Sri Sathya Sai Institute of Higher Medical Sciences in
Puttaparthi is a 220-bed facility that provides free surgical and medical care
and was inaugurated by Prime Minister Narasimha Rao on 22 November 1991. The
Sri Sathya Sai Institute of Higher Medical Sciences in Bangalore is a 333-bed
hospital meant to benefit the poor. The hospital was inaugurated on 19 January
2001 by Prime Minister Atal Behari Vajpayee. The hospital has provided free
medical care to over 250,000 patients. The Sri Sathya Sai General Hospital was
opened in Whitefield, Bangalore, in 1977 and provides complex surgeries, food
and medicines free of cost. The hospital has treated over 2 million patients.
The Sri Sathya Sai Central Trust runs several general hospitals, two specialty
hospitals, eye hospitals and mobile dispensaries and conducts medical camps in
rural and slum areas in India. The Trust has also funded several major drinking
water projects. One project completed in 1996 supplies water to 1.2 million
people in about 750 villages in the drought-prone Anantapur district in Andhra
Pradesh. The second drinking water project, completed in 2004, supplies water
to Chennai through a rebuilt waterway named "Sathya Sai Ganga Canal". Tamil
Nadu Chief Minister M. Karunanidhi praised the Chennai water project and Sai
Baba's involvement. Other completed water projects include the Medak District
Project benefiting 450,000 people in 179 villages and the Mahbubnagar District
Project benefitting 350,000 people in 141 villages. In January 2007, the Sri
Sathya Sai Central Trust said it would start a drinking water project in Latur,
Maharashtra. In 2008, 2 million people in the state of Orissa were affected by
floods. As a relief measure, Sri Sathya Sai Seva Organization, has built 699
houses as a part of their first phase in 16 villages by March 2009. Sathya Sai
Baba's "Educare" program seeks to found schools throughout the world with the
goal of educating children in the five human values. According to the Sai
Educare site, schools have been founded in 33 countries, including Australia,
Mexico, the United Kingdom and Peru. The Times of Zambia states, "The positive
influence of Sathya Sai is unprecedented in the annals of education in Zambia.
Sai Baba's education ideals as embodied in his human values-based approach in
education are an eye opener to educationists in Zambia." In Canada, the Fraser
Institute, an independent Canadian research and educational organization,
ranked the Sathya Sai School of Canada as one of the top 37 elementary schools
in Ontario. The Sathya Sai School scored a perfect 10 out of 10 in the
Institute's overall rating for academic performance. On 23 November 1999, the
Department of Posts, Government of India, released a postage stamp and a postal
cover in recognition of the service rendered by Sathya Sai Baba in addressing
the problem of providing safe drinking water to the rural masses. In September
2000 UNESCO withdrew from an educational conference which was going to be held
in Prashanthi Nilaym, one of the ashrams of Sathya Sai Baba. As it was
explained by UNESCO in the press-release, it was because of a deep concern
about widely-reported allegations of sexual abuse involving youths and children
that had been levelled at Sathya Sai Baba. On 23 November 2001, the digital
radio network Radio Sai Global Harmony was launched through the World Space
Organization, United States. Dr Michael Oleinikof Nobel (distant relative to
Alfred Nobel and one of the patrons for the radio network) said that the radio
network would spread Sathya Sai Baba's message of global harmony and peace. In
January 2007, an event was held in Chennai Nehru stadium organised by the
Chennai Citizens Conclave to thank Sathya Sai Baba for the 200 crore water
project which brought water from the River Krishna in Andhra Pradesh to Chennai
city. Four chief ministers attended the function. Sathya Sai Organisation. The
Sathya Sai Organisation reports that there are an estimated 1,200 Sathya Sai
Baba Centers in 114 countries. However, the number of active Sathya Sai Baba
followers is hard to determine. Estimates vary from 6 million*Brown, Mick
(2000-10-28). "Divine Downfall". Daily Telegraph. http://www.telegraph.co.uk/
health/main.jhtml?xml=/health/2000/10/28/tlbaba28.xml. Retrieved 2007-03-
12*Edwards, Linda (2001). A Brief Guide to Beliefs: Ideas, Theologies,
Mysteries, and Movements. Westminster John Knox Press. ISBN 0-664-22259-5. up
to nearly 100 million. In India itself, Sai Baba drew followers predominantly
from the upper-middle-class, the urban sections of society who have the "most
wealth, education and exposure to Western ideas." In 2002, he claimed to have
followers in 178 countries. Sathya Sai Baba founded a large number of schools
and colleges, hospitals, and other charitable institutions in India and abroad,
the total value of which is usually estimated at Rs. 40,000 crore (US$ 9
billion). However, estimates as high as 1.4 trillion rupees (about US$ 31.5bn)
have also been made. After his death, questions about the manner in which the
finances of the organization were managed led to speculations of impropriety,
with some reports suggesting that suitcases containing cash and/or gold had
been removed from his personal lodgings. On 17 June 2011, officials from the
Sri Sathya Sai Central Trust (founded as a charitable Trust in India, and
legislated to act separately from religious activities), opened his private
residence in the presence of government, bank and tax department officials,
including retired Supreme Court Judge A P Mishra and retired judge of Karnataka
High Court Vaidyanatha, an assessor approved by the Income Tax Department, and
former Chief Justice of India P N Bhagavati. In the residence, which had been
sealed since his death, they inventoried 98¬ kg of gold ornaments, approximate
value Rs 21 crore (US$4.7m), 307¬ kg of silver ornaments, approximate value Rs
1.6 crore (US$0.36m), and Rs 11.6 crore (US$2.6m) in cash. The cash was
deposited into the Sai Trust's account at the State Bank of India with payment
of government taxes (thus transferring them from religious gifts to Trust
assets.) The gold and other items were inventoried, assessed, and placed in
secure storage. In July, district authorities found an additional Rs 77 lakh
(US$0.17m) in valuables in another 4 rooms, including valuable watches. The
total value is believed to exceed 7.8 million US dollars. Also found at
Yajurmandir were many articles routinely given away as gifts in various
ceremonies to devotees and those who did 'seva' (service), including thousands
of pure silk sarees, dhotis, shirts, 500 pairs of shoes, a large number of
silver and gold ‚Äúmangala sutrams‚Äù, and precious stones such as diamonds.
There were also 750 saffron and white robes of the type Sai Baba wore, and
dozens of bottles of perfume and hairspray which he reportedly used before
meeting dignitaries. In July 2011, a search of his Bangalore-area ashram found
6¬ kg of gold coins and jewellery, 245¬ kg of silver articles and Rs 80 lakh in
cash. Satyajit, a close aide of Sri Satya Sai Baba, has released to the media a
declaration of Sai Baba registered on March 23, 1967, in Bombay (now Mumbai)
saying his relatives had no authority over the Satya Sai Trust assets. The text
of the declaration, released here on Sunday September 2, 2012: ‚ÄúI, Satya Sai,
Prashanti Nilayam, Indian, hereby declare as follows: I was born in the village
of Puttapathi in Anantapur district and am at present 44 years old. I joined
school and gave up studies and dedicated myself to spread Sanatana Dharma. I am
unmarried and left my parents at the age of 12 and have taken up religious
order with saffron dress and I have no worldly/or family attachments. I declare
that I left parents permanently and adopted holy order with no intention to
revert back. I relinquished all my right title and interest in family property,
moveable or immovable, whatsoever and wherever they may, and I do not own and
possess personal property or wealth or estate. Whatever is given to me is under
my management, supervision and control as a trustee to be used for public
charitable purposes. This declaration, I am making so (that) nobody can claim,
under or through me, in the family properties if any.‚Äù Satyajit also attached
the attestation of Indu Lal Sha, who is the sole surviving witness to the
original document. Satyajit said he has been in possession of the document
since 1998, as per the directions of Sai Baba. Critical examinations. In April
1976, H. Narasimhaiah, a physicist, rationalist and then vice chancellor of
Bangalore University, founded and chaired a committee "to rationally and
scientifically investigate miracles and other verifiable superstitions".
Narasimhaiah wrote Sathya Sai Baba three letters that were widely publicized,
in which he publicly challenged him to perform his miracles under controlled
conditions. Sathya Sai Baba said that he ignored Narasimhaiah's challenge
because he felt his approach was improper, adding that "Science must confine
its inquiry only to things belonging to the human senses, while spiritualism
transcends the senses. If you want to understand the nature of spiritual power
you can do so only through the path of spirituality and not science. What
science has been able to unravel is merely a fraction of the cosmic
phenomena¬ ..." Narasimhaiah's committee was dissolved in August 1977.
According to Erlendur Haraldsson, the formal challenge from the committee came
to a dead end because of the negative attitude of the committee, and perhaps
because of all the fanfare surrounding it. Narasimhaiah held the fact that
Sathya Sai Baba ignored his letters to be one of several indications that his
miracles were fraudulent. As a result of this episode, a public debate raged
for several months in Indian newspapers. Indian rationalist Basava Premanand
stated in a BBC documentary that he had been investigating Sathya Sai Baba
since 1968 and that, in his opinion, Sai Baba faked his materialisations. He
sued Sai Baba in 1986 for violations of the Gold Control Act, citing Sathya Sai
Baba's purported "materializations" of gold objects. When the case was
dismissed, Premanand unsuccessfully appealed on the grounds that claimed
spiritual power is not a defense recognized in law. The magician James Randi
wrote about Sathya Sai Baba and Premanand, "Examination of films and videotapes
of Sai Baba's actual performances show them to be simple sleight of hand,
exactly the same as the sort used by the other Indian jaduwallahs, or 'street
conjurors.' Sai Baba has never submitted to an examination of his abilities
under controls, so his claims are totally unproven. Parsimony applies here.
India's leading debunker of the claims of the god-men who infest that country,
the famous Premanand, has duplicated all of Sai Baba's tricks and tours the
world demonstrating these feats." A 1995 TV documentary "Guru Busters",
produced by filmmaker Robert Eagle for UK's Channel 4, similarly accused Sathya
Sai Baba of faking his materializations. The clip from the film was mentioned
in the Deccan Chronicle, on 23 November 1992, on a front page headline ""DD
Tape Unveils Baba Magic"". However, Haraldsson stated that, on investigating
the DD video, researchers did not find evidence of fake materialisation as
claimed by Deccan chronicle. According to Haraldsson, the video was taken to a
company which investigates corporate fraud. In spite of improving the
graininess of the low quality video with enhanced filters and running it
through advanced image processing systems, Haraldsson stated the DD video did
not provide firm evidence of sleight of hand. In 1998, British journalist Mick
Brown stated in his book "The Spiritual Tourist" that Sathya Sai Baba's claim
of "resurrecting" the American devotee Walter Cowan in 1971 was probably
untrue. His opinion was based on letters from the attending doctors presented
in the magazine "Indian Skeptic", published by Premanand. Brown also related,
in the same book, his experiences with manifestations of "vibuthi" from Sathya
Sai Baba's pictures in houses in London, which he felt were not fraudulent or
the result of trickery. Brown wrote with regards to Sathya Sai Baba's claims of
omniscience, that "skeptics have produced documentation clearly showing
discrepancies between Baba's reading of historical events and biblical
prophecies, and the established accounts." In December 2000, the magazine
"India Today" published a cover story about Sai Baba with allegations of fakery
made by the magician P. C. Sorcar, Jr. Documentaries produced by the BBC and
the Danish Broadcasting Corporation, analyzing videos of the supposed miracles,
suggested that they could be explained as sleight of hand. In his book
"Redemptive Encounters: Three Modern Styles in the Hindu Tradition", Lawrence
A. Babb wrote about Sathya Sai Baba, "Whoever he is, he is certainly more than
the mere parlour magician many of his critics claim that he is." Criticism and
controversy. Accusations leveled against Sathya Sai Baba by his critics have
included everything from sexual abuse, money laundering, fraud in the
performance of service projects, to murder. In 2004, in the UK and
internationally, the BBC and other national networks aired a documentary titled
"The Secret Swami", as part of its series "The World Uncovered". One central
theme of the BBC documentary was Alaya Rahm's sexual abuse allegations against
Sathya Sai Baba. The documentary interviewed him together with Mark Roche, who
had devoted 25 years of his life since 1969 to the movement and alleged abuse
by Sai Baba. Another documentary, "Seduced By Sai Baba", carried interviews of
abuse allegations. It was produced by Denmark's national television and radio
broadcast company, Danmarks Radio (DR). The show also presented allegations
from Indian skeptic Basava Premanand, who campaigned against Sai Baba for over
30 years. He claimed Sai Baba was "not just a fraud, but a dangerous sexual
abuser". According to him, rumours about sexual abuse had been circulating for
years, but due to the popularity of the internet, the tide of claims against
Sai Baba " a groundswell". Though his claims spanned 30 years, he stated that
his stories were similar, a common practice being the rubbing of genitals with
oil by the spiritual leader. Among his claims were that one ex-devotee claimed
Sai Baba "put the oil on his hands, told me to drop my pants and rubbed my
genitals with the oil". Premanand theorized that many Indian boys were abused
but were never heard from because they too afraid to speak out, alleging Sai
Baba was well-connected with the elite and powerful of India. The "Vancouver
Sun" in 2001 reported that Sathya Sai Baba told his adherents not to browse the
Internet due to allegations rapidly circulating on various Internet websites
and in a few newspapers. In a 2000 public discourse, Sathya Sai Baba said,
"These teachings (the Vedas) are highly sacred. Today people are ready to
believe all that they see on television and internet but do not repose their
faith in the Vedic declarations. Internet is like a waste paper basket. Follow
the 'innernet,' not the internet." Responses to criticism. The guru and his
followers consistently denied the charges of misconduct, which were never
proved. Devotees generally responded to allegations, such as those of sexual
misconduct, with outright denial, asserting that former followers were
vindictive and not reputable ‚Äì fickle people who one day sang Sathya Sai
Baba's praises and then turned against him when some wish of theirs was not
fulfilled. A second common response was that even if some of the allegations by
critics were correct, they simply lacked the vision to understand things in
their correct spiritual context, or were failing to understand the meaning of
"lila", Sathya Sai Baba's divine play. Devotee Bill Aitken was quoted by "The
Week" as saying that Sathya Sai Baba's reputation had not been harmed by the
negative stories published about the guru. He said that the more detractors
railed against Sathya Sai Baba, the more new devotees went to see him. In the
article "Divine Downfall", published in the "Daily Telegraph", Anil Kumar, the
ex-principal of the Sathya Sai Educational Institute, said that he believed
that the controversy was part of Baba's divine plan and that all great
religious teachers had to face criticism during their lives. Anil Kumar also
said that allegations had been leveled at Sathya Sai Baba since childhood, but
with every criticism he had become more and more triumphant. The "Times Of
India" on 26 December 2000 said that Sathya Sai Baba "lashed out at his
detractors in a rare display of anger" while referring to criticism published
in a magazine. The Times quoted him as saying, "Jesus Christ underwent many
hardships, and was put to the cross because of jealousy. Many around him could
not bear the good work he did and the large number of followers he gathered.
One of his disciples, Judas, betrayed him. In those days there was one Judas,
but today there are thousands. Just as that Judas was tempted to betray Jesus,
the Judases of today, too, are bought out to lie. Jealousy was the motive
behind the allegations levelled at him."
