Sin In Abrahamic contexts, sin is the act of violating God's will. Sin can also
be viewed as anything within individuals that violates the ideal relationship
between them and God. Some crimes are regarded as sins and some sins are
regarded as greater than others. In this nuanced concept of sin, sins fall in a
spectrum from least corrupt and evil to greatest evil. Catholicism regards the
least corrupt sins as venial sins—which are part of human living and carry
little divine consequence. Conversely, sins of great evil are mortal
sins—which bring the dire consequence of going to Hell if unrepented. Sins of
careless living are considered destructive and lead to greater sins according
to the Seven Deadly Sins. Another concept of sin deals with things that exist
on Earth but not in Heaven. Food, for example, while a necessary good for the
(health of the temporal) body, is not of (eternal) transcendental living and
therefore its "excessive" savoring is considered a sin. History of the term.
The word derives from “Old English syn(n), for original *sunjō... The stem
may be related to that of Latin sons, sont-is guilty. In Old English there are
examples of the original general sense, ‘offence, wrong-doing, misdeed'”.
The Biblical terms that have been translated from Greek and Hebrew literally
refer to missing a target, i.e. error. Religions. Bahá'í. In the Bahá'í
Faith, humans are considered naturally good (perfect), fundamentally spiritual
beings. Human beings were created because of God's immeasurable love. However,
the Bahá'í teachings compare the human heart to a mirror, which, if turned
away from the light of the sun (i.e. God), is incapable of receiving God's
love. Buddhism. Buddhism does not recognize the idea behind sin, but believes
in the principle of "karma", whereby suffering is the inevitable consequence of
greed, anger, and delusion (known as the Three poisons). While there is no
direct Buddhist equivalent of the Abrahamic concept of sin, wrongdoing is
recognized in Buddhism. The concept of Buddhist ethics is consequentialist in
nature and is not based upon duty towards any deity. Christianity. In Western
Christianity, sin is believed to alienate the sinner from God. It has damaged,
and completely severed, the relationship of humanity to God. That relationship
can only be restored through acceptance of Jesus Christ and his death on the
cross as a substitutionary sacrifice for mankind's sin. In Eastern
Christianity, sin is viewed in terms of its effects on relationships, both
among people and between people and God. Sin is seen as the refusal to follow
God's plan, and the desire to be "like God" (Genesis 3:5) and thus in direct
opposition to God's will (see the account of Adam and Eve in the Book of
Genesis). Original sin is a Western concept which states that sin entered the
human world through Adam and Eve's sin in the Garden of Eden, and that human
beings have since lived with the consequences of this first sin. One concept of
sin deals with things that exist on Earth, but not in Heaven. Food, for
example, while a necessary good for the (health of the temporal) body, is not
of (eternal) transcendental living and therefore its "excessive" savoring is
considered a sin. The unforgivable sin (or eternal sin) is a sin that can never
be forgiven. In Catholic Christianity sins are classified into grave sins
called mortal sins and pardonable sins called venial sin. Grave sins cause one
to lose heaven unless the sinner repents and pardonable sins require some sort
of penance either on Earth or in Purgatory. Hinduism. In Hinduism, the term
"sin" ("" in Sanskrit) is often used to describe actions that create negative
karma by violating moral and ethical codes, which automatically brings negative
consequences. This is different from Abrahamic sin in the sense that pāpa is
"not" a crime against the will of God, but against (1) Dharma, or moral order,
and (2) one's own self. Islam. Muslims see sin ("dhanb, thanb" ذنب) as
anything that goes against the commands of God (Allah). Islam teaches that sin
is an act and not a state of being. The Qur'an teaches that "the soul is
certainly prone to evil, unless the Lord does bestow His Mercy" and that even
the prophets do not absolve themselves of the blame. It is believed that Iblis
(Satan) has a significant role in tempting humankind towards sin. One may
sincerely repent to God for the wrongs committed and seek forgiveness, as
stated in the Quran, "Our Lord! Forgive us our sins, remove from us our
iniquities, and take to Yourself our souls in the company of the righteous."
(Al-Imran.193/ 3.193). "Say Oh my slaves who have transgressed against their
own souls despair not of the mercy of God, verily He forgives all sins, verily
He is the oft-forgiving, most merciful" (Al-Zumar) Judaism. Judaism regards the
violation of any of the 613 commandments as a sin. Judaism teaches that sin is
an act, and not a state of being. Humankind was not created with an inclination
to do evil, but has that inclination "from his youth".() Shinto. Evil deeds
fall into two categories in Shinto: "amatsu tsumi", "the most pernicious crimes
of all", and "kunitsu tsumi", "more commonly called misdemeanors". See also.
Catholic Terms
