Syncretism Syncretism is the combining of different (often seemingly
contradictory) beliefs, often while melding practices of various schools of
thought. Syncretism may involve the merger and analogising of several
originally discrete traditions, especially in the theology and mythology of
religion, thus asserting an underlying unity and allowing for an inclusive
approach to other faiths. Syncretism occurs commonly in expressions of arts and
culture (known as eclecticism) as well as politics (syncretic politics).
Nomenclature, orthography, and etymology. The Oxford English Dictionary first
attests the word "syncretism" in English in 1618. It derives from modern Latin
"syncretismus", drawing on Greek συγκρητισμός ("synkretismos"),
meaning "Cretan federation". The Greek word occurs in Plutarch's (1st century
AD) essay on "Fraternal Love" in his "Moralia" (2.490b). He cites the example
of the Cretans, who compromised and reconciled their differences and came
together in alliance when faced with external dangers. "And that is their so-
called "Syncretism"". Erasmus probably coined the modern usage of the Latin
word in his "Adagia" ("Adages"), published in the winter of 1517–1518, to
designate the coherence of dissenters in spite of their differences in
theological opinions. In a letter to Melanchthon of April 22, 1519, Erasmus
specifically adduced the Cretans of Plutarch as an example of his adage
"Concord is a mighty rampart". Social and political roles. Overt syncretism in
folk belief may show cultural acceptance of an alien or previous tradition, but
the "other" cult may survive or infiltrate without authorized "syncresis"
nevertheless. For example, some Conversos developed a sort of cult for martyr-
victims of the Spanish Inquisition, thus incorporating elements of Catholicism
while resisting it. Some religious movements have embraced overt syncretism,
such as the case of melding Shintō beliefs into Buddhism or the amalgamation
of Germanic and Celtic pagan views into Christianity during its spread into
Gaul, the British Isles, Germany, and Scandinavia. Indian influences are seen
in the practice of Shi'i Islam in Trinidad. Others have strongly rejected it as
devaluing and compromising precious and genuine distinctions; examples of this
include post-Exile Second Temple Judaism, Islam, and most of Protestant
Christianity. Syncretism tends to facilitate coexistence and unity between
otherwise different cultures and worldviews (intercultural competence), a
factor that has recommended it to rulers of multi-ethnic realms. Conversely,
the rejection of syncretism, usually in the name of "piety" and "orthodoxy",
may help to generate, bolster or authenticate a sense of uncompromised cultural
unity in a well-defined minority or majority. Religious syncretism. Religious
syncretism exhibits blending of two or more religious belief systems into a new
system, or the incorporation into a religious tradition of beliefs from
unrelated traditions. This can occur for many reasons, and the latter scenario
happens quite commonly in areas where multiple religious traditions exist in
proximity and function actively in the culture, or when a culture is conquered,
and the conquerors bring their religious beliefs with them, but do not succeed
in entirely eradicating the old beliefs or, especially, practices. Religions
may have syncretic elements to their beliefs or history, but adherents of so-
labeled systems often frown on applying the label, especially adherents who
belong to "revealed" religious systems, such as the Abrahamic religions, or any
system that exhibits an exclusivist approach. Such adherents sometimes see
syncretism as a betrayal of their pure truth. By this reasoning, adding an
incompatible belief corrupts the original religion, rendering it no longer
true. Indeed, critics of a specific syncretistic trend may sometimes use the
word "syncretism" as a disparaging epithet, as a charge implying that those who
seek to incorporate a new view, belief, or practice into a religious system
actually distort the original faith. Non-exclusivist systems of belief, on the
other hand, may feel quite free to incorporate other traditions into their own.
Others state that the term syncretism is an elusive one, and can be applied to
refer to substitution or modification of the central elements of Christianity
or Islam of beliefs or practices introduced from somewhere else. The
consequences under this definition, according to Keith Fernando, is a fatal
compromise of the religion's integrity. In modern secular society, religious
innovators sometimes create new religions syncretically as a mechanism to
reduce inter-religious tension and enmity, often with the effect of offending
the original religions in question. Such religions, however, do maintain some
appeal to a less exclusivist audience. Discussions of some of these blended
religions appear in the individual sections below. Ancient Greece. Classical
Athens was exclusive in matters of religion. The Decree of Diopithes made the
introduction of and belief in foreign Gods a criminal offence and only Greeks
were allowed to worship in Athenian temples and festivals as foreigners were
considered impure. Syncretism functioned as a feature of Hellenistic Ancient
Greek religion although only outside of Greece. Overall, Hellenistic culture in
the age that followed Alexander the Great itself showed syncretist features,
essentially blending of Mesopotamian, Persian, Anatolian, Egyptian (and
eventually Etruscan–Roman) elements within an Hellenic formula. The Egyptian
god Amun developed as the Hellenized "Zeus Ammon" after Alexander the Great
went into the desert to seek out Amun's oracle at Siwa. Such identifications
derive from "interpretatio graeca", the Hellenic habit of identifying gods of
disparate mythologies with their own. When the proto-Greeks (peoples whose
language would evolve into Greek proper) first arrived in the Aegean and on the
mainland of modern-day Greece early in the 2nd millennium BCE, they found
localized nymphs and divinities already connected with every important feature
of the landscape: mountain, cave, grove and spring all had their own locally
venerated deity. The countless epithets of the Olympian gods reflect their
syncretic identification with these various figures. One defines ""Zeus
Molossos"" (worshipped only at Dodona) as "the god identical to Zeus as
worshipped by the Molossians at Dodona". Much of the apparently arbitrary and
trivial mythic fabling results from later mythographers' attempts to explain
these obscure epithets. Judaism. In "Moses and Monotheism", Sigmund Freud made
a case for Judaism arising out of the pre-existing monotheism that was briefly
imposed upon Egypt during the rule of Akhenaten. Aten, the disk of the Sun in
ancient Egyptian mythology, and originally an aspect of Ra, was chosen as the
sole deity for Akhenaten's new religion. The "Code of Hammurabi" is also cited
as a likely starting point for the Jewish Ten Commandments. Hammurabi was from
the Mesopotamian culture that revered Marduk, among others. Judaism fought
lengthy battles against syncretist tendencies: note the case of the golden calf
and the railing of prophets against temple prostitution, witchcraft and local
fertility cults, as told in the Tanakh. On the other hand, some scholars hold
that Judaism refined its concept of monotheism and adopted features such as its
eschatology, angelology and demonology through contacts with Zoroastrianism. In
spite of the Jewish halakhic prohibitions on polytheism, idolatry, and
associated practices ("avodah zarah"), several combinations of Judaism with
other religions have sprung up: Jewish Buddhism, Nazarenism, Judeo-Paganism,
Messianic Judaism, Jewish Mormonism, and others such as Judeo-Christianity.
Until relatively recently, China had a Jewish community which had adopted some
Confucian practices. Several of the Jewish Messiah claimants (such as Jacob
Frank) and the Sabbateans came to mix Cabalistic Judaism with Christianity and
Islam. Roman world. The Romans, identifying themselves as common heirs to a
very similar civilization, identified Greek deities with similar figures in the
Etruscan-Roman tradition, though without usually copying cult practices. (For
details, see Interpretatio graeca.) Syncretic gods of the Hellenistic period
found also wide favor in Rome: Serapis, Isis and Mithras, for example. Cybele
as worshipped in Rome essentially represented a syncretic East Mediterranean
goddess. The Romans imported the Greek god Dionysus into Rome, where he merged
with the Latin mead god "Liber", and converted the Anatolian Sabazios into the
Roman Sabazius. The degree of correspondence varied: Jupiter makes perhaps a
better match for Zeus than the rural huntress Diana does for the feared
Artemis. Ares does not quite match Mars. The Romans physically imported the
Anatolian goddess Cybele into Rome from her Anatolian cult-center Pessinos in
the form of her original aniconic archaic stone idol; they identified her as
"Magna Mater" and gave her a matronly, iconic image developed in Hellenistic
Pergamum. Likewise, when the Romans encountered Celts and Germanic peoples,
they mingled these peoples' gods with their own, creating Sulis Minerva, Apollo
Sucellos (Apollo the Good Smiter) and Mars Thingsus (Mars of the war-assembly),
among many others. In the "Germania", the Roman historian Tacitus speaks of
Germanic worshippers of Hercules and Mercury; most modern scholars tentatively
identify Hercules as Thor and Mercury as Odin. Christianity. Syncretism did not
play a role when Christianity split into eastern and western rites during the
Great Schism. It became involved, however, with the rifts of the Protestant
Reformation, with Desiderius Erasmus's readings of Plutarch. Even earlier,
Syncretism was a fundamental aspect of the efforts of Neoplatonists such as
Marsilio Ficino to reform the teachings of the Roman Catholic Church. In 1615,
David Pareus of Heidelberg urged Christians to a "pious syncretism" in opposing
the Antichrist, but few 17th-century Protestants discussed the compromises that
might effect a reconciliation with the Catholic Church: Johann Hülsemann,
Johann Georg Dorsche and Abraham Calovius (1612–85) opposed the Lutheran
Georg Calisen "Calixtus" (1586–1656) of the University of Helmstedt for his
"syncretism". (See: Syncretistic Controversy.) Catholicism in Central and South
America has integrated a number of elements derived from indigenous and slave
cultures in those areas (see the Caribbean and modern sections); while many
African Initiated Churches demonstrate an integration of Protestant and
traditional African beliefs. In Asia the revolutionary movements of Taiping
(19th-century China) and God's Army (Karen in the 1990s) have blended
Christianity and traditional beliefs. The Catholic Church allows some symbols
and traditions to be carried over from older belief systems, so long as they
are remade to fit into a Christian worldview; syncretism of other religions
with Catholicism, such as Voudun or Santería, is condemned by the Church. One
can contrast Christian syncretism with contextualization or inculturation, the
practice of making Christianity relevant to a culture: "Contextualisation" does
not address the doctrine but affects a change in the styles or expression of
worship. Although Christians often took their European music and building
styles into churches in other parts of the world, in a contextualization
approach, they would build churches, sing songs, and pray in a local ethnic
style. Some Jesuit missionaries adapted local systems and images to teach
Christianity, as did the Portuguese in China. In this view, "syncretism"
implies compromising the message of Christianity by merging it with not just a
culture, but another religion, common examples being animism or ancestor
worship. The Latter Day Saint movement can be framed as a syncretic outgrowth
of main-line Christianity. Syncretistic controversy. The syncretistic
controversy was the theological debate provoked by the efforts of Georg Calixt
and his supporters to secure a basis on which the Lutherans could make
overtures to the Roman Catholic and the Reformed Churches. It lasted from 1640
to 1686. Calixt, a professor at Helmstedt, had through travels in England, the
Netherlands, Italy, and France, acquaintance with the different churches and
their representatives, and extensive study, developed a more open attitude
toward the different religious bodies than had the majority of his contemporary
Lutheran theologians. While the latter firmly adhered to the "pure doctrine",
Calixt tended not to regard doctrine as the one thing necessary for a
Christian, nor did he regard all doctrine as equally certain and important.
Consequently, he advocated unity between those who agreed on the fundamental
minimum, with liberty as to all less fundamental points. In regard to
Catholicism, he would have (as Melanchthon once would have) conceded to the
pope a primacy human in origin, and he also admitted that one might call the
Mass a sacrifice. The theological faculties of Helmstedt, Rinteln, and
Königsberg supported Calixt; opposed were those of Leipzig, Jena, Strasburg,
Giessen, Marburg, and Greifswald. Abraham Calov opposed Calixt. The Elector of
Saxony, for political reasons, opposed the Reformed Church, because the other
two secular electors (Palatine and Brandenburg) were "reformed", and were
competing with him. In 1649 he wrote to the three dukes of Brunswick, who
maintained Helmstedt as their common university, and expressed the objections
of his Lutheran professors, complaining that Calixt wished to extract the
elements of truth from all religions, fuse all into a new religion, and provoke
a schism. In 1650 Calov became a professor at Wittenberg, and quickly attacked
the Syncretists in Helmstedt. An outburst of polemical writings followed. In
1650 the dukes of Brunswick responded with the desire to limit the discord, and
proposed a meeting of the political councillors. Saxony, however, did not
favour this suggestion. An attempt to convene theologians was unsuccessful. The
theologians of Wittenberg and Leipzig condemned 98 heresies of the Helmstedt
theologians. They urged that this "Formula of Concord" be signed by everyone
who wished to remain in the Lutheran Church. Outside Wittenberg and Leipzig,
however, it was not accepted, and Calixt's death in 1656 ushered in five years
of almost undisturbed peace. The controversy broke out afresh in Hesse-Kassel,
where Landgrave William VI sought to effect a union between his Lutheran and
Reformed subjects, or at least to lessen their mutual hatred. In 1661 he had a
colloquy held in Kassel between the Lutheran theologians of the University of
Rinteln and the Reformed theologians of the University of Marburg. Enraged at
this revival of the syncretism of Calixt, the Wittenberg theologians called on
the Rinteln professors to make their submission, whereupon the latter answered
with a detailed defence. Another long series of polemical treatises followed.
In Brandenburg-Prussia in 1663, the Great Elector (Frederick William I) forbade
preachers from speaking of the Evangelical disputes. A long colloquy in Berlin
(September 1662 to May 1663) led only to fresh discord. Growing impatient, the
Elector ended his conferences in 1664 and published another "syncretistic"
edict. Since the edict disallowed the Formula of Concord, one of the Lutheran
Confessions as contained in the "Book of Concord", many Lutheran clergy did not
comply with the edict. Whoever refused to sign the form declaring his intention
to observe this regulation was deprived of his position, including Paul
Gerhardt, a pastor and noted hymnwriter. The citizens of Berlin petitioned to
have him restored, and owing to their repeated requests, the Elector made an
exception for Gerhardt. His conscience did not allow him to retain the post and
Gernardt lived in Berlin for more than a year without fixed employment. During
this time his wife also died, leaving him with one surviving child. The Elector
withdrew the edict a few months later, but Gerhardt's patroness, Electress
Louisa Henrietta, had died, so he was still without a position. Calixt's son,
Friedrich Ulrich Calixt, defended his father's views against the Wittenberg
theologians's calling his school "un-Lutheran" and heretical. The younger
Calixt tried to show that his father's doctrine did not differ much from that
of his opponents. Wittenberg had a new champion in Ægidius Strauch, who
attacked Calixt with all his resources of learning, polemics, and wit. The
Helmstedt side was defended by the celebrated scholar and statesman, Hermann
Conring. The Saxon princes recognized that trying to carry through the
"Consensus" might lead to a fresh schism in the Lutheran Church, and endanger
its position related to Catholic power. They forbade the Saxon theologians from
continuing the controversy in writing. Negotiations for peace then resulted,
with Duke Ernst the Pious of Saxe-Gotha especially active. They considered
creating a permanent college of theologians to decide theological disputes.
However, the negotiations with the courts of Brunswick, Mecklenburg, Denmark,
and Sweden remained as fruitless as those with the theological faculties,
except that peace was maintained until 1675. Calov renewed hostilities. He
attacked not only Calixt, but also and particularly the moderate John Musæus
of Jena. Calov succeeded in having the University of Jena and Musæus compelled
to renounce syncretism. But this was his last victory. The Elector renewed his
prohibition against polemical writings. Calov seemed to give way for a time.
Although he returned to his attack on the syncretists, he died in 1686, and the
controversy ended. The Syncretist Controversy had the result of lessening
religious hatred and of promoting mutual forbearance. Catholicism benefited, as
some Protestants came to better understand and appreciate it. In Protestant
theology, it prepared the way for the sentimental theology of Pietism to become
more popular than Lutheran orthodoxy. Islam. The mystical tradition in Islam,
known as Sufism appears somewhat syncretic in nature, not only in its origins
but also in its beliefs since it espouses the concepts of Wahdat-al-Wujud and
Wahdat-al-Shuhud that are, to a great extent, synonymous to Pantheism and
Panentheism and sometimes Monism although the traditional Islamic belief system
reject them and stress on strict monotheism called Tawhid. Druze religion. The
Druzes integrated elements of Ismaili Islam with Gnosticism and Platonism.
Barghawata. The Barghawata kingdom followed a syncretic religion inspired by
Islam (perhaps influenced by Judaism) with elements of Sunni, Shi'ite and
Kharijite Islam, mixed with astrological and heathen traditions. Supposedly,
they had their own Qur'an in the Berber language comprising 80 suras under the
leadership of the second ruler of the dynasty Salih ibn Tarif who had taken
part in the Maysara uprising. He proclaimed himself a prophet. He also claimed
to be the final Mahdi, and that Isa (Jesus) would be his companion and pray
behind him. Bahá'í Faith. The Bahá'ís follow Bahá'u'lláh, a prophet whom
they consider a successor to Muhammad, Jesus, Moses, Buddha, Zoroaster, and
Abraham. This acceptance of other religious founders has encouraged some to
regard the Bahá'í religion as a syncretic faith. However, Bahá'ís and the
Bahá'í writings explicitly reject this view. Bahá'ís consider
Bahá'u'lláh's revelation an independent, though related, revelation from God.
Its relationship to previous dispensations is seen as analogous to the
relationship of Christianity to Judaism. They regard beliefs held in common as
evidence of truth, progressively revealed by God throughout human history, and
culminating in (at present) the Bahá'í revelation. Bahá'ís have their own
sacred scripture, interpretations, laws and practices that, for Bahá'ís,
supersede those of other faiths. Caribbean religions and cultures. The process
of syncretism in the Caribbean region often forms a part of cultural
creolization. (The technical term "Creole" may apply to anyone born and raised
in the region, regardless of ethnicity.) The shared histories of the Caribbean
islands include long periods of European Imperialism (mainly by Spain, France,
and the United Kingdom) and the importation of African slaves (primarily from
Central and Western Africa). The influences of each of the above interacted in
varying degrees on the islands, producing the fabric of society that exists
today in the Caribbean. The Rastafari movement, founded in Jamaica, syncretizes
vigorously, mixing elements from the Bible, Marcus Garvey's Pan Africanism
movement, Hinduism, and Caribbean culture. Another highly syncretic religion of
the area, vodou, combines elements of Western African, native Caribbean, and
Christian (especially Roman Catholic) beliefs. See the modern section for other
Caribbean syncretisms. Indian traditions. Hinduism, Buddhism and Jainism in
ancient India have made many adaptations over the millennia, assimilating
elements of various diverse religious traditions. One example of this is the
Yoga Vasistha. The Mughal emperor Akbar, who wanted to consolidate the diverse
religious communities in his empire, propounded Din-i-Ilahi, a syncretic
religion intended to merge the best elements of the religions of his empire
Meivazhi (Tamil: மெய்வழி) is a syncretic monotheistic minority
religion based in Tamil Nadu, India. Its focus is spiritual enlightenment and
the conquering of death, through the teachings. Mevaizhi preaches the Oneness
of essence message of all the previous major scriptures - particularly
Hinduism, Buddhism, Islam, Judaism and Christianity - allowing membership
regardless of creed. Meivazhi's disciples are thousands of people belonging
once to 69 different castes of different religions being united as one family
of Meivazhi Religion. Other modern syncretic religions. Recently developed
religious systems that exhibit marked syncretism include the New World
religions Candomblé, "21 Division", Vodou and Santería, which analogize
various Yorùbá and other African deities to the Roman Catholic saints. Some
sects of Candomblé have also incorporated Native American deities, and Umbanda
combined African deities with Kardecist spiritualism. Hoodoo is a similarly
derived form of folk magic practiced by some African American communities in
the Southern United States. Other traditions of syncretic folk religion in
North America include Louisiana Voodoo as well as Pennsylvania Dutch Pow-wow,
in which practitioners profess to invoke power through the Christian God. Many
historical Native American religious movements have incorporated Christian
European influence, like the Native American Church, the Ghost Dance, and the
religion of Handsome Lake. Unitarian Universalism also provides an example of a
modern syncretic religion. It traces its roots to Universalist and Unitarian
Christian congregations. However, modern Unitarian Universalism freely
incorporates elements from other religious and non-religious traditions, so
that it no longer identifies as "Christian." Theosophy and the Theosophy-based
Ascended Master Teachings are syncretic religions that combine deities
primarily from Christianity, Hinduism and Buddhism into an elaborate Spiritual
Hierarchy. Universal Sufism seeks the unity of all people and religions.
Universal Sufis strive to "realize and spread the knowledge of Unity, the
religion of Love, and Wisdom, so that the biases and prejudices of faiths and
beliefs may, of themselves, fall away, the human heart overflow with love, and
all hatred caused by distinctions and differences be rooted out." In Vietnam,
Caodaism blends elements of Buddhism, Catholicism and Kardecism. Several new
Japanese religions, (such as Konkokyo and Seicho-No-Ie), are syncretistic. The
Nigerian religion Chrislam combines Christian and Islamic doctrines. Thelema is
a mixture of many different schools of belief and practice, including
Hermeticism, Eastern Mysticism, Yoga, 19th century libertarian philosophies
(e.g. Nietzsche), occultism, and the Kabbalah, as well as ancient Egyptian and
Greek religion. Examples of strongly syncretist Romantic and modern movements
with some religious elements include mysticism, occultism, theosophy, modern
astrology, Neopaganism, and the New Age movement. In China, most of the
population follows syncretist religions combining Mahayana Buddhism, Taoism and
elements of Confucianism. Out of all Chinese believers, approximately 85.7%
adhere to Chinese traditional religion, as many profess to be both Mahayana
Buddhist and Taoist at the same time. Many of the pagodas in China are
dedicated to both Buddhist and Taoist deities. In Réunion, the Malbars combine
elements of Hinduism and Christianity. The Unification Church, founded by
religious leader Sun Myung Moon in South Korea in 1954. Its teachings are based
on the Bible, but include new interpretations not found in mainstream Judaism
and Christianity and incorporates Asian traditions. Cultures and societies.
During The Enlightenment. The modern, rational non-pejorative connotations of
syncretism date from Denis Diderot's "Encyclopédie" articles: "Eclecticisme"
and "Syncrétistes, Hénotiques, ou Conciliateurs." Diderot portrayed
syncretism as the concordance of eclectic sources.
