Taboo A taboo (, ) is a vehement prohibition of an action based on the belief
that such behavior is either too sacred or too accursed for ordinary
individuals to undertake, under threat of supernatural punishment. Such
prohibitions are present in virtually all societies. The word has been somewhat
expanded in the social sciences to include strong prohibitions relating to any
area of human activity or custom that is sacred or forbidden based on moral
judgment and religious beliefs. "Breaking a taboo" is usually considered
objectionable by society in general, not merely a subset of a culture.
Etymology. and The term was translated to him as "consecrated, inviolable,
forbidden, unclean or cursed". "Tabu" itself has been derived from alleged
Tongan morphemes "ta" ("mark") and "bu" ("especially"), but this may be a folk
etymology (note that Tongan does not actually have a phoneme /b/), and "tapu"
is usually treated as a unitary, non-compound word inherited from Proto-
Polynesian *"tapu", in turn inherited from Proto-Oceanic *"tabu", with the
reconstructed meaning "sacred, forbidden". In its current use on Tonga, the
word "tapu" means "sacred" or "holy", often in the sense of being restricted or
protected by custom or law. On the main island, the word is often appended to
the end of "Tonga" as "Tongatapu", here meaning "Sacred South" rather than
"Forbidden South". Examples. Sigmund Freud posited that incest and patricide
were the only two universal taboos and formed the basis of civilization.
However, although cannibalism, in-group murder, and incest are taboo in the
majority of societies, modern research has found exceptions for each and no
taboo is presently known to be universal. Common taboos include restrictions or
ritual regulation of killing and hunting; sex and sexual relationships
(primarily incest, pedophilia, necrophilia, intermarriage, miscegenation,
adultery, fornication, and bestiality); reproduction (abortion, infanticide);
the deceased and their graves; food and dining (primarily cannibalism and
dietary laws such as vegetarianism, "kashrut", and "halal"); and bodily
functions (primarily menstrual cycles, but also defecation and urination).
Taboos often extend to cover discussion of taboo topics, resulting in
euphemisms and replacement of taboo words. Function. Taboos may serve many
functions and often remain in effect after their original reason has
disappeared. Communist and materialist theorists have argued that taboos can be
used to reveal the histories of societies when other records are lacking.
Marvin Harris particularly endeavored to explain taboos as a consequence of
ecologic and economic conditions. Modernity. The rise of rationalism and
science has reduced the potency of many former taboos in modern cultures. In
the United States and Europe, people openly discuss and explore previously
taboo subjects such as sexuality and abortion. Increasing understanding has led
medical disorders such as epilepsy, birth defects, and sexually transmitted
diseases to be treated more analytically and less judgmentally than in the
past. However, changing social customs and standards also create new taboos,
such as bans on slavery; conflation of ephebophilia with pedophilia;
prohibitions on alcohol, tobacco, or psychopharmaceutical consumption
(particularly among pregnant women); and the employment of politically correct
euphemismsat times quite unsuccessfullyto mitigate various forms of
discrimination. Incest itself has been pulled both ways, with some seeking to
normalize consensual adult relationships regardless of the degree of kinship
(notably in Europe) and others expanding the degrees of prohibited contact
(notably in the United States). Contemporary multicultural societies have
established a number of taboos rooted in the perceived injustice and
deleterious effects of modern history, particularly neocolonialism. Tribalisms
(for example, ethnocentrism and nationalism) and prejudices (racism, sexism,
religious extremism) are opposed at times reflexively despite the potentially
high cost of diverse societies in terms of trust and solidarity.
