Temple Mount The Temple Mount, known in Hebrew (and in Judaism) as Har
haB√°yith () and in Arabic (and in Islam) as the Haram Ash-Sharif (, "al-haram
al-qudsƒ´ ash-sharƒ´f", "Noble Sanctuary"), is one of the most important
religious sites in the Old City of Jerusalem. It has been used as a religious
site for thousands of years. At least four religions are known to have used the
Temple Mount: Judaism, Islam, Christianity, and Roman paganism. Biblical
scholars have often identified it with two biblical mountains of uncertain
location: Mount Moriah where the binding of Isaac took place, and Mount Zion
where the original Jebusite fortress stood; however, both interpretations are
disputed. Judaism regards the Temple Mount as the place where God chose the
Divine Presence to rest (Isa 8:18); according to the rabbinic sages whose
debates produced the Talmud, it was from here the world expanded into its
present form and where God gathered the dust used to create the first man,
Adam. The site is the location of Abraham's binding of Isaac, and of two Jewish
Temples. According to the Bible the site should function as the center of all
national life‚Äîa governmental, judicial and, of course, religious center (Deut
12:5-26; 14:23-25; 15:20; 16:2-16; 17:8-10; 26: 2; 31: 11; Isa 2: 2-5; Oba 1:
21; Psa 48). During the Second Temple Period it functioned also as an
economical center. From that location the word of God will come out to all
nations, and that is the site where all prayers are focused. According to
Jewish tradition and scripture (2 Chronicles 3:1-2), the first temple was built
by Solomon the son of David in 957 BCE and destroyed by the Babylonians in 586
BCE. The second was constructed under the auspices of Zerubbabel in 516 BCE and
destroyed by the Roman Empire in 70 CE. Jewish tradition maintains it is here
the Third and final Temple will also be built. The location is the holiest site
in Judaism and is the place Jews turn towards during prayer. Due to its extreme
sanctity, many Jews will not walk on the Mount itself, to avoid unintentionally
entering the area where the Holy of Holies stood, since according to Rabbinical
law, some aspect of the Divine Presence is still present at the site. It was
from the Holy of Holies that the High Priest communicated directly with God.
Among Sunni Muslims, the Mount is widely considered to be the third holiest
site in Islam. Revered as the Noble Sanctuary (Bait-ul-Muqaddas) and the
location of Muhammad's journey to Jerusalem and ascent to heaven, the site is
also associated with Jewish biblical prophets who are also venerated in Islam.
After the Muslim conquest of Jerusalem in 637 CE, Umayyad Caliphs commissioned
the construction of the al-Aqsa Mosque and Dome of the Rock on the site. The
Dome was completed in 692 CE, making it one of the oldest extant Islamic
structures in the world, after the Kaabah. The Al Aqsa Mosque rests on the far
southern side of the Mount, facing Mecca. The Dome of the Rock currently sits
in the middle, occupying or close to the area where the Bible mandates the Holy
Temple be rebuilt. In light of the dual claims of both Judaism and Islam, it is
one of the most contested religious sites in the world. Since the Crusades, the
Muslim community of Jerusalem has managed the site as a Waqf, without
interruption. As part of the Old City, controlled by Israel since 1967, both
Israel and the Palestinian Authority claim sovereignty over the site, which
remains a major focal point of the Arab-Israeli conflict. In an attempt to keep
the status quo, the Israeli government enforces a controversial ban on prayer
by non-Muslim visitors. Location and dimensions. The Temple Mount forms the
northern portion of a very narrow spur of hill that slopes sharply from north
to south. Rising above the Kidron Valley to the east and Tyropoeon Valley to
the west, its peak reaches a height of above sea level. In around 19 BCE, Herod
the Great extended the Mount's natural plateau by enclosing the area with four
massive retaining walls and filling the voids. This artificial expansion
resulted in a large flat expanse which today forms the eastern section of the
Old City of Jerusalem. The trapezium shaped platform measures 488¬ m along the
west, 470¬ m along the east, 315¬ m along the north and 280¬ m along the south,
giving a total area of approximately . The northern wall of the Mount, together
with the northern section of the western wall, is hidden behind residential
buildings. The southern section of the western flank is revealed and contains
what is known as the Western Wall. The retaining walls on these two sides
descend many meters below ground level. A northern portion of the western wall
may be seen from within the Western Wall Tunnel, which was excavated through
buildings adjacent to the platform. On the southern and eastern sides the walls
are visible almost to their full height. The platform itself is separated from
the rest of the Old City by the Tyropoeon Valley, though this once deep valley
is now largely hidden beneath later deposits, and is imperceptible in places.
The platform can be reached via Bridge Street ‚Äì a street in the Muslim
Quarter at the level of the platform, actually sitting on a monumental bridge;
the bridge is no longer externally visible due to the change in ground level,
but it may be seen from beneath via the Western Wall Tunnel. History. Israelite
period. The hill is believed to have been inhabited since the 4th millennium
BCE. Assuming colocation with the biblical Mount Zion, its southern section
would have been walled at the beginning of the 2nd millennium BCE, in around
1850 BCE, by Canaanites who established a settlement there (or in the vicinity)
named Jebus. Biblical scholars have also identified it with Mount Moriah where
the binding of Isaac took place. According to the Hebrew Bible, Mount Moriah
was originally a threshing-floor owned by Araunah, a Jebusite. The prophet Gad
suggested the area to King David as a fitting place for the erection of an
altar to YHWH, since it was there a destroying angel was standing when God
stopped a great plague in Jerusalem. David then bought the property from
Araunah, for fifty pieces of silver, and erected the altar. YHWH instructed
David to build a sanctuary on the site, outside the city walls on the northern
edge of the hill. The building was to replace the Tabernacle, and serve as the
Temple of the Israelites in Jerusalem. The Temple Mount is an important part of
Biblical archaeology. Achaemenid Persian, Hasmonean periods, and Herod‚Äôs
expansion. Much of the Mount's early history is synonymous with events
pertaining to the Temple itself. After the destruction of Solomon‚Äôs Temple by
Nebuchadnezzar II, construction of the Second Temple began under Cyrus in
around 538 BCE, and completed in 516 BCE. Evidence of a Hasmonean expansion of
the Temple Mount has been recovered by archaeologist Leen Ritmeyer. Around 19
BCE, Herod the Great further expanded the Mount and rebuilt the temple. The
ambitious project, which involved the employment of 10,000 workers, more than
doubled the size of Temple Mount to approximately . Herod leveled the area by
cutting away rock on the northwest side and raising the sloping ground to the
south. He achieved this by constructing huge buttress walls and vaults, filling
the necessary sections with earth and rubble. A basilica (the Royal Stoa) was
constructed on the southern end of the expanded platform, which provided a
focus for the city's commercial and legal transactions, and which was provided
with separate access to the city below via the Robinson's Arch overpass. In
addition to restoration of the Temple, its courtyards, and porticoes, Herod
also built Antonia Fortress abutting the northwestern corner of the Temple
Mount, and a rainwater reservoir, Birket Israel, in the northeast. As a result
of the First Jewish-Roman War, the fortress was destroyed by Roman emperor
Vespasian, in 70 CE, under the command of his son and imperial heir, Titus.
Middle Roman period. The city of Aelia Capitolina was built in 130 CE by the
Roman emperor Hadrian, and occupied by a Roman colony on the site of Jerusalem,
which was still in ruins from the First Jewish Revolt in 70 CE. "Aelia" came
from Hadrian's "nomen gentile", "Aelius", while "Capitolina" meant that the new
city was dedicated to "Jupiter Capitolinus", to whom a temple was built on the
site of the former second Jewish temple, the Temple Mount. Hadrian had intended
the construction of the new city as a gift to the Jews, but since he had
constructed a giant statue of himself in front of the Temple of Jupiter and the
Temple of Jupiter had a huge statue of Jupiter inside of it, there were now two
enormous graven images on the Temple Mount. It was also the normal practice of
the adherents of the Hellenic religion to sacrifice pigs before their deities.
In addition to this, Hadrian issued a decree prohibiting the practice of
circumcision. These three factors, the graven images, the sacrifice of pigs
before the altar, and the prohibition of circumcision, constituted for non-
Hellenized radical Zealot Jews a new abomination of desolation, and thus Bar
Kochba launched the Third Jewish Revolt. After the Third Jewish Revolt failed,
all Jews were forbidden on pain of death from entering the city. Late Roman
period. About 325 it is believed that Constantine's mother, St. Helena, built a
small church on the Mount in the 4th century, calling it the Church of St.
Cyrus and St. John, later on enlarged and called the Church of the Holy Wisdom.
The church was later destroyed and on its ruins the Dome of the Rock was built.
Since it is known that Helena ordered the Temple of Venus to the west of the
Temple Mount to be torn down to construct the Church of the Holy Sepulchre,
presumably she also ordered the Temple of Jupiter on the Temple Mount to be
torn down to construct the Church of St. Cyrus and St. John. In 363, Emperor
Julian, on his way to engage Persia, stopped at the ruins of the Second Temple
in Jerusalem. Julian granted the Jews permission to begin rebuilding the
Temple. To Christians, the destroyed Temple was a symbol of Christianity's
triumph over Judaism, and Julian, was an opponent of Christianity. Rebuilding
work began, but was ended by the Galilee earthquake of 363. There are records
of Jews continuing to offer sacrifices on the Foundation Stone after the
destruction of the Temple and into the Byzantine period. Byzantine period.
Archaeological evidence in the form of an elaborate mosaic floor similar to the
one in the Church of the Nativity in Bethlehem and multiple fragments of an
elaborate marble Templon (chancel screen) prove that an elaborate Byzantine
church or monastery or other public building stood on the Temple Mount in
Byzantine times, presumably the aforementioned Holy Wisdom Church. Sassanid
vassal state period. "See Jewish revolt against Heraclius" "See also Byzantine-
Sassanid War of 602-628" In 610, the Sassanid Empire drove the Byzantine Empire
out of the Middle East, giving the Jews control of Jerusalem for the first time
in centuries. The Jews in Palestine were allowed to set up a vassal state under
the Sassanid Empire called the "Sassanid Jewish Commonewealth" which lasted for
five years. Jewish rabbis ordered the restart of animal sacrifice for the first
time since the time of Second Temple and started to reconstruct the Jewish
Temple. Shortly before the Byzantines took the area back five years later in
615, the Persians gave control to the Christian population, who tore down the
partially built Jewish Temple edifice and turned it into a garbage dump, which
is what it was when the Caliph Omar took the city in the 630s. Arabic period.
Upon the capture of Jerusalem by the victorious Caliph Omar, Omar immediately
headed to the Temple Mount with his advisor, Ka'ab al-Ahbar, a formerly Jewish
rabbi who had converted to Islam, in order to find the holy site of the
"Furthest Mosque" or "Al Masjid al Aqsa" which was mentioned in the Quran and
specified in the Hadiths of being in Jerusalem.Ka'ab al-Ahbar suggested to
Caliph Omar to build the Dome of the Rock monument on the site that Ka'ab
believed to be the Biblical "Holy of the Holies", arguing that this site is
where Mohammad ascended to heaven during the Isra and Mi'raj miracle. The
actual construction of the Muslim monuments at the southeast corner, facing
Mecca, near which the al-Aqsa Mosque were built 78 years later. The original
building is now known to have been wooden and to have been constructed on the
site of a Byzantine public building with an elaborate mosaic floor. (The
Persian conquest that immediately preceded the Arab conquest makes it uncertain
who destroyed the building.) In 691 an octagonal Islamic building topped by a
dome was built by the Caliph Abd al-Malik around the rock, for a myriad of
political, dynastic and religious reasons, built on local and Koranic
traditions articulating the site's holiness, a process in which textual and
architectural narratives reinforced one another. The shrine became known as the
Dome of the Rock ("Qubbat as-Sakhra" ŸÇÿ®ÿ© ÿßŸÑÿµÿÆÿ±ÿ©). The dome itself was
covered in gold in 1920. In 715 the Umayyads led by the Caliph al-Walid I,
rebuilt the Temple's nearby Chanuyot into a mosque (see illustrations and
detailed drawing) which they named "al-Masjid al-Aqsa" ÿßŸÑŸÖÿ≥ÿ¨ÿØ
ÿßŸÑÿ£ŸÇÿµŸâ, the al-Aqsa Mosque or in translation "the furthest mosque",
corresponding to the Islamic belief of Muhammad's miraculous nocturnal journey
as recounted in the Qur'an and hadith. The term "al-Haram al-Sharif" ÿßŸÑÿ≠ÿ±ŸÖ
ÿßŸÑÿ¥ÿ±ŸäŸÅ (the Noble Sanctuary) refers to the whole area that surrounds that
Rock as was called later by the Mamluks and Ottomans. For Muslims, the
importance of the Dome of the Rock and al-Aqsa Mosque makes Jerusalem the
third-holiest city, after Mecca and Medina. The mosque and shrine are currently
administered by a Waqf (an Islamic trust). The various inscriptions on the Dome
walls and the artistic decorations imply on symbolic eschatological
significance of the structure. From the Arabic Conquest to the Crusades there
seems to have been good relations between the Arab rulers and the Jewish
minority. A Jewish synagogue was built on the Temple Mount. Its location has
not been established, but it was destroyed by the Crusaders when they took the
city and massacred the Jews and Muslims in 1099. Ottoman period. Following the
Ottoman conquest of Palestine in 1516, the Ottoman authorities continued the
policy of prohibiting non-Muslims from setting foot on the Temple Mount until
the early 19th-century, when non-Muslims were again permitted to visit the
site. In 1867, a team from the Royal Engineers, led by Lieutenant Charles
Warren and financed by the Palestine Exploration Fund (P.E.F.), discovered a
series of underground tunnels near the Temple Mount. Warren secretly excavated
some tunnels near the Temple Mount walls and was the first one to document
their lower courses. Warren also conducted some small scale excavations inside
the Temple Mount, by removing rubble that blocked passages leading from the
Double Gate chamber. British Mandate period. Between 1922 and 1924, the Dome of
the Rock was restored by the Islamic Higher Council. Jordanian period. Jordan
undertook two renovations of the Dome of the Rock, replacing the leaking,
wooden dome with an aluminum dome in 1952, and, when the new dome leaked,
carrying out a second restoration between 1959 and 1964. Neither Israeli Arabs
nor Israeli Jews could visit their holy places in the Jordanian territories
during this period. Israeli period. During the 1967 Six-Day War Israel captured
the Temple Mount together with all of East Jerusalem and the West Bank from
Jordan, who had controlled it since 1948. The Chief Rabbi of the Israeli
Defense Forces, Shlomo Goren, led the soldiers in religious celebrations on the
Temple Mount and at the Western Wall. The Israeli Chief Rabbinate also declared
a religious holiday on the anniversary, called "Yom Yerushalayim" (Jerusalem
Day), which also became a national holiday that commemorates the reunification
of the city. Many Jews saw the capture of Jerusalem and the Temple Mount as a
miraculous liberation of biblical-messianic proportion. A few days after the
war was over 200,000 Jews flocked to the Western Wall in the first mass Jewish
pilgrimage near the mount since the destruction of Temple in 69 CE. However,
the Israeli government subsequently left the Islamic waqf in control of the
site. The site has become a flash-point between Israel and the Muslim world. On
October 8, 1990, Israeli forces patrolling the site blocked worshipers from
accessing it. A tear gas canister was accidentally detonated among the female
worshipers, which caused events to escalate. Rocks were eventually thrown,
while security forces fired rounds that ended up killing 20 people and injured
around 140 more. An Israeli enquiry found Israeli forces at fault, but it also
concluded that charges could not be brought against any particular individuals.
Between 1992 and 1994, the Jordanian government undertook the unprecedented
step of gilding the dome of the Dome of the Rock, covering it with 5000 gold
plates, and restoring and reinforcing the structure. The Salah Eddin minbar was
also restored. The project was paid for by King Hussein personally, at a cost
of $8 million. The Second Palestinian Intifada is often cited as being sparked
by a visit made to the Temple Mount by Israeli opposition leader Ariel Sharon.
He toured the site, together with a Likud party delegation and a large number
of Israeli riot police, on September 28, 2000. The visit was seen as a
provocative gesture by many Palestinians, who gathered around the site.
Demonstrations soon turned violent, with both rubber bullets and tear gas being
used. This event is often cited as one of the catalysts of the Second Intifada.
Also in this period, Palestinian authorities have begun excavations at the
Temple Mount, damaging the structural integrity of the site; see below.
Management and access. An Islamic Waqf has managed the Temple Mount
continuously since the Muslim reconquest of the Kingdom of Jerusalem in 1187.
On June 7, 1967, soon after Israel had taken control of the area during the
Six-Day War, Prime Minister Levi Eshkol assured that "no harm whatsoever shall
come to the places sacred to all religions". Together with the extension of
Israeli jurisdiction and administration over east Jerusalem, the Knesset passed
the Preservation of the Holy Places Law, ensuring protection of the Holy Places
against desecration, as well as freedom of access thereto. Israel agreed to
leave administration of the site in the hands of the Waqf. Although freedom of
access was enshrined in the law, as a security measure, the Israeli government
currently enforces a ban on non-Muslim prayer on the site. Non-Muslims who are
observed praying on the site are subject to expulsion by the police. At various
times, when there is fear of Arab rioting upon the mount resulting in throwing
stones from above towards the Western Wall Plaza, Israel has prevented Muslim
men under 45 from praying in the compound, citing these concerns. Sometimes
such restrictions have coincided with Friday prayers during the Islamic holy
month of Ramadan. Normally, West Bank Palestinians are allowed access to
Jerusalem only during Islamic holidays, with access usually restricted to men
over 35 and women of any age eligible for permits to enter the city.
Palestinian residents of Jerusalem, which because of Israel's annexation of
Jerusalem, hold Israeli permanent residency cards, and Israeli Arabs, are
permitted unrestricted access to the Temple Mount. Current features. An
additional flat platform was built above the portion of the hill rising above
the general level of the top of the Temple Mount, and this upper platform is
the location of the Dome of the Rock; the rock in question is the bedrock at
the peak of the hill, just breaching the floor level of the upper platform.
Beneath the rock is a natural cave known as the Well of Souls, originally
accessible only by a narrow hole in the rock itself, Crusaders hacked open an
entrance to the cave from the south, by which it can now be entered. There is
also a smaller domed building on the upper platform, slightly to the east of
the Dome of the Rock, known as the Dome of the Chain ‚Äî traditionally the
location where a chain once rose to heaven. Several stairways rise to the upper
platform from the lower; that at the northwest corner is believed by some
archaeologists be part of a much wider monumental staircase, mostly hidden or
destroyed, and dating from the Second Temple era. The walls of the platform
contain several gateways, all currently blocked. In the east wall is the Golden
Gate, through which legend states the Jewish Messiah would enter Jerusalem. On
the southern face are the Hulda Gates ‚Äî the "triple gate" (which has three
arches) and the "double gate" (which has two arches, and is partly obscured by
a Crusader building); these were the entrance and exit (respectively) to the
Temple Mount from Ophel (the oldest part of Jerusalem), and the main access to
the Mount for ordinary Jews. In the western face, near the southern corner, is
the Barclay's Gate ‚Äì only half visible due to a building on the northern
side. Also in the western face, hidden by later construction but visible via
the recent Western Wall Tunnels, and only rediscovered by Warren, is Warren's
Gate; the function of these western gates is obscure, but many Jews view
Warren's Gate as particularly holy, due to its location due west of the Dome of
the Rock. Traditional belief considers the Dome of the Rock to have earlier
been the location at which the Holy of Holies was placed; numerous alternative
opinions exist, based on study and calculations, such as those of Tuvia Sagiv.
Warren was able to investigate the inside of these gates. Warren's Gate and the
Golden Gate simply head towards the centre of the Mount, fairly quickly giving
access to the surface by steps. Barclay's Gate is similar, but abruptly turns
south as it does so; the reason for this is currently unknown. The double and
triple gates (the "Huldah Gates") are more substantial; heading into the Mount
for some distance they each finally have steps rising to the surface just north
of the al-Aqsa Mosque. The passageway for each is vaulted, and has two aisles
(in the case of the triple gate, a third aisle exists for a brief distance
beyond the gate); the eastern aisle of the double gates and western of the
triple gates reach the surface, the other aisles terminating some way before
the steps ‚Äì Warren believed that one aisle of each original passage was
extended when the al-Aqsa Mosque blocked the original surface exits. East of
and joined to the triple gate passageway is a large vaulted area, supporting
the southeastern corner of the Temple Mount platform ‚Äì which is substantially
above the bedrock at this point ‚Äì the vaulted chambers here are popularly
referred to as King Solomon's Stables. They were used as stables by the
Crusaders, but were built by Herod the Great ‚Äì along with the platform they
were built to support. In the process of investigating Cistern 10, Warren
discovered tunnels that lay "under" the Triple Gate passageway. These passages
lead in erratic directions, some leading beyond the southern edge of the Temple
Mount (they are at a depth below the base of the walls); their purpose is
currently unknown ‚Äì as is whether they predate the Temple Mount ‚Äì a
situation not helped by the fact that apart from Warren's expedition no one
else is known to have visited them. The existing four minarets include three
near the Western Wall and one near the northern wall. The first minaret was
constructed on the southwest corner of the Temple Mount in 1278. The second was
built in 1297 by order of a Mameluk king, the third by a governor of Jerusalem
in 1329, and the last in 1367. Alterations to antiquities and damage to
existing structures. Due to the extreme political sensitivity of the site, no
real archaeological excavations have even been conducted on the Temple Mount
itself. Protests commonly occur whenever archaeologists conduct projects near
the Mount. Aside from visual observation of surface features, most other
archaeological knowledge of the site comes from the 19th century survey carried
out by Charles Wilson and Charles Warren and others. This sensitivity has not
prevented the Muslim Waqf from destroying archeological evidence on a number of
occasions. After the Six-Day War of 1967, Israeli archeologists began a series
of excavations near the site at the southern wall that uncovered finds from the
Second Temple period through Roman, Umayyad and Crusader times. Over the period
1970‚Äì88, a number of tunnels were excavated in the vicinity, including one
that passed to the west of the Mount and became known as the Western Wall
Tunnel, which was opened to the public in 1996. The same year the Waqf began
construction of a new mosque in the structures known since Crusader times as
Solomon's Stables. Many Israelis regarded this as a radical change of the
status quo, which should not have been undertaken without first consulting the
Israeli government. The project was done without attention to the possibility
of disturbing historically significant archaeological material, with stone and
ancient artifacts treated without regard to their preservation. In October
1999, the Islamic Waqf, and the Islamic Movement conducted an illegal dig which
inflicted much archaeological damage. The earth from this operation, which has
archeological wealth relevant to Jewish, Christian and Muslim history, was
removed by heavy machinery and unceremoniously dumped by trucks into the nearby
Kidron Valley. Although the archeological finds in the earth are already not in
situ, this soil still contains great archeological potential. No archeological
excavation was ever conducted on the Temple Mount, and this soil was the only
archeological information that has ever been available to anyone. For this
reason Israeli archaeologists Dr. Gabriel Barkay and Zachi Zweig established a
unique project for sifting all the earth in this dump: the Temple Mount
Antiquities Salvage Operation. In late 2002, a bulge of about 700¬ mm was
reported in the southern retaining wall part of the Temple Mount. A Jordanian
team of engineers recommended replacing or resetting most of the stones in the
affected area. In February 2004, the eastern wall of the Mount was damaged by
an earthquake. The damage threatened to topple sections of the wall into the
area known as Solomon's Stables. A few days later, a portion of retaining wall,
supporting the earthen ramp that led from the Western Wall plaza to the Gate of
the Moors on the Temple Mount, collapsed. In 2007 the Israel Antiquities
Authority started work on the construction of a temporary wooden pedestrian
pathway to replace the Mugrabi Gate ramp after a landslide in 2005 made it
unsafe and in danger of collapse. The works sparked condemnation from Arab
leaders. In July 2007 the Muslim religious trust which administers the Mount
began digging a 400-metre-long, 1.5-metre-deep trench from the northern side of
the Temple Mount compound to the Dome of the Rock in order to replace 40-year-
old electric cables in the area. Israeli archaeologists accused the waqf of a
deliberate act of cultural vandalism. Israelis allege that Palestinians are
deliberately removing significant amounts of archaeological evidence about the
Jewish past of the site and claim to have found significant artifacts in the
fill removed by bulldozers and trucks from the Temple Mount. Muslims allege
that the Israelis are deliberately damaging the remains of Islamic-era
buildings found in their excavations. Since the Waqf is granted almost full
autonomy on the Islamic holy sites, Israeli archaeologists have been prevented
from inspecting the area; although they have conducted several excavations
around the Temple Mount. Religious attitudes. In Judaism. Jewish connection and
veneration to the site arguably stems from the fact that it contains the
Foundation Stone which, according to the rabbis of the Talmud, was the spot
from where the world was created and expanded into its current form. It was
subsequently the Holy of Holies of the Temple, the Most Holy Place in Judaism.
Jewish tradition names it as the location for a number of important events
which occurred in the Bible, including the Binding of Isaac, Jacob's dream, and
the prayer of Isaac and Rebekah. Similarly, when the Bible recounts that King
David purchased a threshing floor owned by Araunah the Jebusite, tradition
locates it as being on this mount. An early Jewish text, the Genesis Rabba,
states that this site is one of three about which the nations of the world
cannot taunt Israel and say "you have stolen them," since it was purchased "for
its full price" by David. David wanted to construct a sanctuary there, but this
was left to his son Solomon, who completed the task in c. 950 BCE with the
construction of the First Temple. In 1217, Spanish Rabbi Judah al-Harizi found
the sight of the Muslim structures on the mount profoundly disturbing. "What
torment to see our holy courts converted into an alien temple!" he wrote. Due
to religious restrictions on entering the most sacred areas of the Temple Mount
(see following section), the Western Wall, a retaining wall for the Temple
Mount and remnant of the Second Temple structure, is considered by some
rabbinical authorities the holiest accessible site for Jews to pray. Jewish
texts record that the Mount will be the site of the Third Temple, which will be
rebuilt with the coming of the Jewish Messiah. Jewish religious law concerning
entry to the site. During Temple times, entry to the Mount was limited by a
complex set of purity laws. Maimonides wrote that it was only permitted to
enter the site to fulfill a religious precept. After the destruction of the
Temple there was discussion as to whether the site, bereft of the Temple, still
maintained its holiness or not. Jewish codifiers accepted the opinion of
Maimonides who ruled that the holiness of the Temple sanctified the site for
eternity and consequently the restrictions on entry to the site are still
currently in force. While secular Jews ascend freely, the question of whether
ascending is permitted is a matter some debate among religious authorities,
with a majority holding that it is permitted to ascend to the Temple Mount, but
not to step on the site of the inner courtyards of the ancient Temple. The
question then becomes whether the site can be ascertained accurately. A second
complex legal debate centers around the precise divine punishment for stepping
onto these forbidden spots. There is debate over whether reports that
Maimonides himself ascended the Mount are reliable. One such report claims he
did so on Thursday, October 21, 1165, during the Crusader period. Some early
scholars however, claim that entry onto certain areas of the Mount are
permitted. It appears that Radbaz also entered the Mount and advised others how
to do this. He permits entry from all the gates into the 135√ó135 cubits of the
Women's Courtyard in the east, since the biblical prohibition only applies to
the 187√ó135 cubits of the Temple in the west. There are also Christian and
Islamic sources which indicate that Jews accessed the site, but these visits
may have been made under duress. Opinions of contemporary rabbis concerning
entry to the site. In August 1967 after Israel's capture of the Mount, the
Chief Rabbis of Israel, Isser Yehuda Unterman and Yitzhak Nissim, together with
other leading rabbis, asserted that "For generations we have warned against and
refrained from entering any part of the Temple Mount." A recent study of this
rabbinical ruling suggests that it was both "unprecedented" and possibly
prompted by governmental pressure on the rabbis, as well as "brilliant" in
preventing Muslim-Jewish friction on the Mount. Rabbinical consensus in the
post-1967 period in the Religious Zionist stream of Orthodox Judaism held that
it is forbidden for Jews to enter any part of the Temple Mount, and in January
2005 a declaration was signed confirming the 1967 decision. Nearly all Haredi
rabbis are also of the opinion that the Mount is off limits to Jews and non-
Jews alike. Their opinions against entering the Temple Mount are based on the
danger of entering the hallowed area of the Temple courtyard and the
impossibility of fulfilling the ritual requirement of cleansing oneself with
the ashes of a red heifer. The boundaries of the areas which are completely
forbidden, while having large portions in common, are delineated differently by
various rabbinic authorities. However, there is a growing body of Modern
Orthodox and national religious rabbis who encourage visits to certain parts of
the Mount, which they believe are permitted according to most medieval
rabbinical authorities. These rabbis include: Shlomo Goren (former Ashkenazi
Chief Rabbi of Israel); Chaim David Halevi (former Chief Rabbi of Tel Aviv and
Yaffo); Dov Lior (Rabbi of Kiryat Arba); Yosef Elboim; Yisrael Ariel; She'ar
Yashuv Cohen (Chief Rabbi of Haifa); Yuval Sherlo (rosh yeshiva of the hesder
yeshiva of Petah Tikva); Meir Kahane. One of them, Shlomo Goren, states that it
is possible that Jews are even allowed to enter the heart of the Dome of the
Rock, according to Jewish Law of Conquest. These authorities demand an attitude
of veneration on the part of Jews ascending the Temple Mount, ablution in a
mikveh prior to the ascent, and the wearing of non-leather shoes. Some rabbinic
authorities are now of the opinion that it is imperative for Jews to ascend in
order to halt the ongoing process of Islamization of the Temple Mount.
Maimonides, perhaps the greatest codifier of Jewish Law, wrote in "Laws of the
Chosen House ch 7 Law 15" "One may bring a dead body in to the (lower
sanctified areas of the) Temple Mount and there is no need to say that the
ritually impure (from the dead) may enter there, because the dead body itself
can enter". One who is ritually impure through direct or in-direct contact of
the dead cannot walk in the higher sanctified areas. For those who are visibly
Jewish, they have no choice, but to follow this peripheral route as it has
become unofficially part of the status quo on the Mount. Many of these recent
opinions rely on archaeological evidence. The law committee of the Masorti
movement in Israel has issued two responsa (a body of written decisions and
rulings given by legal scholars) on the subject, both holding that Jews may
visit the permitted sections of the Temple Mount. One responsa allows such
visits, another encourages them. In Islam. In Islam, the Mount is called "al-
haram al-qudsƒ´ ash-sharƒ´f", meaning the Noble Sanctuary. Muslims view the
site as being one of the earliest and most noteworthy places of worship of God.
For a few years in the early stages of Islam, Muhammad instructed his followers
to face the Mount during prayer, as the Jews did. "Exalted is He who took His
Servant by night from al-Masjid al-Haram (the Sacred Mosque) to al-Masjid al-
Aqsa (the Further Mosque), whose surroundings We have blessed, to show him of
Our signs. Indeed, He is the Hearing, the Seeing." Quran 17:1 "When the people
of Quraish did not believe me (i.e. the story of my Night Journey), I stood up
in Al-Hijr and Allah displayed Jerusalem in front of me, and I began describing
Jerusalem to them while I was looking at it." Sahih Bukhari: Volume 5, Book 58,
Number 226. Muslim interpretations of the Qur'an agree that the Mount is the
site of a Temple built by Sulayman, considered a prophet in Islam, that was
later destroyed. After the construction, Muslims believe, the temple was used
for the worship of one God by many prophets of Islam, including Jesus. Other
Muslim scholars have used the Torah (called "Tawrat" in Arabic) to expand on
the details of the temple. In Christianity. The Mount has significance in
Christianity due to the role the Temple played in the life of Jesus. During the
Crusades, the Dome of the Rock was given to the Augustinians, who turned it
into a church, and the Al-Aqsa Mosque became the royal palace of Baldwin I of
Jerusalem in 1104. The Knights Templar, who believed the Dome of the Rock was
the site of the Temple of Solomon, gave it the name "Templum Domini" and set up
their headquarters in the Al-Aqsa Mosque adjacent to the Dome for much of the
12th century. Though some Christians believe that the Temple will be
reconstructed before, or concurrent with, the Second Coming of Jesus (also see
dispensationalism), the Temple Mount is largely unimportant to the beliefs and
worship of most Christians. To wit, the New Testament recounts a story of a
Samaritan woman asking Jesus about the appropriate place to worship, Jerusalem
or the Samaritan holy place at Mt. Gerazim, to which Jesus replies, "Woman,
believe me, the hour is coming when neither on this mountain nor in Jerusalem
will you worship the Father. You worship what you do not know; we worship what
we know, for salvation is from the Jews. But the hour is coming, and is now
here, when the true worshipers will worship the Father in spirit and in truth,
for the Father is seeking such people to worship him. God is spirit, and those
who worship him must worship in spirit and truth."() The place is of some
importance to Eastern Christians because there was a fully consecrated church
on that spot during the Byzantine period. According to Eastern Church canons,
once a church has been fully consecrated, it cannot ever serve as anything
other than a church. Of course, this is just one example of the thousands of
churches that were either destroyed, or converted to mosques, during the long
decline of the Eastern Roman Empire. The most notable example is the Hagia
Sophia in Istanbul.
