United Submitters International United Submitters International (also called
the Submitters) is a reformist moderate Islamic religious community, and is a
branch of Quraniyoon. It follows the teachings of Rashad Khalifa who is
regarded in this faith as God's messenger of the Covenant, who claims to be
prophesied in the Old Testament, the New Testament, and the Quran. The majority
of Muslims consider him and his belief as heretical. Submission is a religion
whereby one recognizes God’s absolute authority, and reaches a conviction
that only God possesses all power; no other entity possesses any power that is
independent of Him. The natural result of such a realization is to devote
one’s life and one’s worship absolutely to God alone. This is the First
Commandment common to all three scriptures: Old Testament, New Testament and
Final Testament (The Quran). The original group attended a mosque in Tucson,
Arizona, which was originally founded by Dr. Rashad Khalifa in the United
States of America. The Submitters can now be found throughout the world. Dr.
Khalifa was assassinated on January 31st 1990. It is believed that he was
assassinated by a person named 'James William' who is in the extremist group
Al-Fuqra', based in Pakistan led by Sheikh Gilani. Beliefs. Submitters describe
themselves as Muslims who submit to God alone and follow Quran alone. A
Submitter can be defined as a person who submits to the will of God. The state
of Submission, which can only take place between the person and God Almighty,
is considered to be the only acceptable form of worship by God. (3:19, 85).
Therefore, Submission is not just a name of a religion; rather it describes
one’s devotion to God alone. Rashad's English Translation of the Quran in
English. Rashad Khalifa also translated the Quran in modern, easy to
understand, English. His authorized English version of the Quran can be found
online. Rejection of hadith and sunnah. Academics and scholars in the Western
tradition have long taken a jaundiced view of hadith (see hadith and sunnah,
historiography of early Islam), believing that many of the "traditions" are
later inventions. Khalifa was notable for being both a practicing Muslim and an
absolutist rejector of hadith and sunnah. He argued foremost that hadith and
sunnah were condemned by the Qur'an Alone ideology. He also argued that the
hadith and sunnah were not credible, and that much of the elaborate structure
of religious and family law, sharia, erected on the basis of the hadith, was
not binding on Muslims. Indeed, he argued that the Qur'an alone was sufficient
as a basis for Islam. His ideas have clearly had some influence, even outside
his group of Submitters, but it would be difficult to quantify it. He promoted
the slogan: The Qur'an, the whole Qur'an, and nothing but the Qur'an Rejection
of two false verses. While Khalifa's early publications claimed that the
numerical code he saw in the Qur'an confirmed that the Qur'an was perfectly
preserved, errors were found in his earlier counts. In the end, to keep the
counts of certain critical words, Khalifa denounced two long-accepted verses
(Sura 9:128–129) of the Qur'an as later interpolations, as a purifier of the
Qur'an. He claimed that the numerical patterns he found in the Qur'an showed
the verses to be false He also pointed to a tradition found in Sahih Bukhari,
that these verses were only found in one version of the ninth sura when the
Qur'an was compiled and standardized[http://www.usc.edu/dept/MSA/fundamentals/
hadithsunnah/bukhari/061.sbt.html#006.061.509 under the early caliph Uthman ibn
Affan. Furthermore he argued that those two verses are labelled as Meccan in a
sura usually accepted as Medinan. As God's Messenger of the Covenant. The
controversy surrounding Khalifa deepened when he informed his followers that he
was the Messenger of the Covenant, prophesied in the Bible (Malachi 3:1-21,
Luke 17:22-36, & Matthew 24:27) and the Qur'an (3:81)[http://www.submission.ws/
quran/suras/index.html], sent to purify and consolidate all God's messages into
one. Khalifa distinguished between "messengers" and "prophets" [http://
www.submission.org/messenger/prophet.html], arguing that prophets brought down
scriptures from God while messengers did not. He considered Muhammad to be the
final Prophet (delivering the final scripture; Qur'an) but not the last
messenger. He proclaimed that every prophet is a messenger but every messenger
is not necessarily a prophet. Purifying the Five Daily Contact prayers (Salat).
Khalifa claimed that it was wrong to mention any name besides the name of God
in any of the worship practices, including the salat, or daily prayer, and the
shahadah, or confession of faith. The usual forms of prayer and confession
mention Muhammad. Removing Muhammad's name was not well received by other
Muslims. Khalifa argued that mentioning the name of any powerless human being
in any of the worship practices was idolatry, or setting up partners beside
God. The Quran's Mathematical Code – the number 19. Khalifa discovered the
Qur'an's mathematical code [http://www.submission.ws/index.php/appendix-1-
mathematical-miracle-of-quran-koran-19.html]. The Submitters believe that the
Quran is characterized by a unique phenomenon never found in any human-authored
book. Every element of the Quran is mathematically composed — the suras, the
verses, the words, the number of certain letters, the number of words from the
same root, the number and variety of divine names, the unique spelling of
certain words, the absence or deliberate alteration of certain letters within
certain words, and many other elements of the Quran besides its content. There
are two major facets of the Quran's mathematical system: (1) The mathematical
literary composition, and (2) The mathematical structure involving the numbers
of suras and verses. Because of this comprehensive mathematical coding, the
slightest distortion of the Quran's text or physical arrangement is immediately
exposed.
