Universal Life Church The Universal Life Church (ULC) is a religious
organization that offers anyone semi-immediate ordination as a ULC minister
free of charge. The organization states that anyone can become a minister
without having to go through the pre-ordination process required by other
religious faiths. Overview. The ULC has no traditional doctrine, believing as
an organization merely in doing "that which is right." Each individual has the
privilege and responsibility to determine what is right for him or her as long
as it does not infringe on the rights of others. The Church does not stand
between the member and his or her belief system. History. The ULC was founded
in 1959 under the name "Life Church" by the Reverend Kirby J. Hensley. He
operated the church out of his garage. Disappointed with the Pentecostal
church, Hensley decided to venture on his own to find his religion. After five
years of studying various religions, according to his own statements, Hensley
concluded that the proper religion may differ for each man, and everyone is
entitled to choose his or her own religion. No one should be criticized or
condemned for wanting to practice the belief of his or her choice. In 1958,
Hensley and his new wife, Lida, moved to Modesto, California. There, he founded
the first Universal Life Church in 1959 as Life Church, later incorporating in
California on May 2, 1962 as Universal Life Church with Co-Founder and (then)
Vice President Lewis Ashmore. Hensley served as the minister of the
congregation and President of the Board of Directors until his death in 1999,
at which time there were many independent branches of the ULC worldwide. They
took out their first advertisement in "FATE" magazine to reach the metaphysical
community. The Modesto congregation grew rapidly. The Church spread throughout
the West Coast, and today claims to have congregations located all over the
United States and parts of Canada and many other parts of the world. The
organization also states it has a membership of 22 million ULC ministers
worldwide. 1960s and 1970s USA. During the 1960s and 1970s many people in the
USA became ministers in the ULC because they believed that being a minister
either would help keep them from being drafted into military service during the
Vietnam War or would enable them to get income tax relief as members of the
clergy. Both of these beliefs have always been false, as merely being ordained
does not exempt a person from compulsory military service, and ministers as
individuals receive no tax benefit; only churches themselves are tax exempt.
Ministers do have the option of applying for exemption from Social Security
taxes; however, this may limit eligibility for Social Security benefits. Also,
this exemption applies only to ministers whose income comes from religious
services and applies only to such income. The Universal Life Church was
referenced by Abbie Hoffman in his 1970 book "Steal This Book", which
encouraged readers to request an ordination from the ULC, receive notification
of the ordination, and then cut out and laminate a card indicating the new
minister's ordination. He regarded the ULC as "unquestionably one of the best
deals going", but also made the mistake of assuming that a ULC ordination would
entitle ordained persons to discounts and tax exemptions. 1980s–present. Upon
Hensley's death, his wife Lida was elected president of the Church. She served
as president until her death in 2006. On January 14, 2007, the ULC's board of
directors elected the Hensleys' son Andre Hensley as President. He had
previously been the office manager of the Headquarters, running the day-to-day
business of the Church. The Church was profiled by "The Modesto Bee" in an
article, "Universal Life Church Still Churning Out Ministers", by Lisa
Millegan. This article, which profiles the Church during its transition
following the death of its founder, was later republished by Beliefnet, a
website owned by News Corp. Ordination and ULC clergy. As of early 2009, ULC
was sending out between 8,500 and 10,000 ordination certificates each month.
Between 1962 and 2008, it sent out almost 18 million, worldwide. The ULC
Headquarters holds weekly church services in a historic church building in
Modesto. ULC ministers are authorized by the church to officiate weddings and
funerals, perform baptisms or verbal baby naming ceremonies, hold services
(also called meetings), and other sacraments and rites regularly performed by
ordained members of clergy and part of the particular belief system the
minister represents. All ministers in the ULC are also authorized and
encouraged to ordain others as ministers in the church. The ordaining minister
informs the home church of the ordination, and the new minister's information
is added to the official church records. Many charter Universal Life churches
have been launched which operate all manner of ministries, and which offer
ordination via websites and on eBay, through which small fees for processing
ordination certificates are often charged. Such small fees are permitted by the
founding church's headquarters in order to to help cover the charter church's
advertising and overhead expenses, and to generate revenue for its ministry.
Beliefs. Dedicated ULC members state that they truly believe in freedom of
religion. In other words, they want every member to be able to pursue their own
beliefs without interference from the government, church or other religious
agencies, or any other outside agency. Their one creed (or doctrine) is Any
person may associate themselves with the Church and, if they feel it is
appropriate, request ordination as a minister. The Universal Life Church does
not issue ministerial certificates to individuals who are currently
incarcerated. Any person may be ordained as a minister as discussed above.
Ministers are allowed to follow their own belief system path. For example,
ministers of the Church may follow a traditional Christian belief system, they
may follow other world religions, they may blend various faith traditions, or
they may be agnostic or atheist. The latter may serve as humanist ministers or
non-religious officiants. (Humanist ministers or officiants may also be
registered by the Humanist Society, a non-related group. The Universal Life
Seminary is one of the many charter churches operated by individual ministers
of the ULC. (The Universal Life Seminary is affiliated to the ULC because the
minister that operates it is a minister in good standing with the ULC.) The
Universal Life Seminary, however, does have some theological beliefs that
differ from the ULC Headquarters. For example, the seminary offers a number of
courses from a spiritual perspective, as well as some from various religious
perspectives, but still very specifically welcomes and promotes people of all
beliefs. The seminary does not claim, however, to speak for the Universal Life
Church as a whole, but offers one of many paths to interested individuals.
Other charter churches, or ministries, that operate include an Order of Jedi,
inspired in part by the philosophy of the Star Wars motion pictures. The Church
is similar in some respects to the Unitarian Universalist Association (UUA),
although the two were never affiliated. The ULC is sometimes said to be a
liberal church with many conservative members. This aspect attracts some
individuals to the ULC who are uncomfortable with the liberal activism and
social views held by the UUA. Church meetings typically allow all present to
speak, a practice similar to the Religious Society of Friends, or Quakers,
although these two groups were also never affiliated. Legal status. Since its
inception, the Universal Life Church has come into legal conflicts over such
issues as the validity of ordinations and the tax-exempt status of the
organization. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) has ruled that the Church was
tax-exempt some years, and not tax-exempt other years, based on the annual
filing statement required of non-profit organizations. Authority to solemnize
marriage and other rites of the church. A large number of people seeking ULC
Ordination do so in order to be able to legally officiate at weddings or
perform other spiritual rites. This aspect of the ULC has provided relief to
interfaith couples or same-sex couples experiencing difficulty in getting their
union performed in a religious atmosphere. Some people living in remote areas
also use their status as ordained ULC ministers to meet the marriage officiant
needs of their communities. In the United States, the requirements for entering
into marriage are determined by state law. Courts in New York, North Carolina,
and Virginia have ruled that, under applicable state law, ULC ministers are not
authorized to solemnize marriages and a marriage at which a ULC minister
officiated therefore is not valid. North Carolina law subsequently was amended
to validate marriages performed by ministers of the Universal Life Church prior
to July 3, 1981. The Supreme Court of Mississippi has ruled that Mississippi
has a less restrictive statute and recognizes ULC ministers as able to perform
valid marriages in that state. Lower courts in Pennsylvania have split on the
issue. On the other hand, several major countries are quite restrictive. In
Canada, ULC ministers have been authorized to solemnize marriage in only a few
local jurisdictions. In many other countries, ULC ministers have no authority
to solemnize lawful marriage. Some ministers avoid this complication by meeting
requirements to solemnize a civil ceremony, which might include being
registered as a notary public or a justice of the peace. In some places, such
as Saudi Arabia and Iran, religion and government are one, and anyone caught
promoting a religious practice outside of the government complex can be
subjected to severe punishment. In many countries, including much of
continental Europe, Turkey, Japan and the countries of the former Soviet Union,
only marriages performed by the state in a civil ceremony are recognised
legally. It is customary for couples who wish a religious—or any
other—ceremony to hold one separately from the civil wedding.
